Downloadedfromhttp://journals.lww.com/indianjpsychiatrybyBhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE=on05/12/2022
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Management of Bipolar Disorder
Nilesh Shah, Sandeep Grover1, G. Prasad Rao2
Department of Psychiatry, L. T. M. Medical College and General Hospital, Sion, Mumbai, 1Department of Psychiatry,
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, 2Schizophrenia and Psychopharmacology Division,
Asha Hospital., Banjara Hills, Hyderabad, India
2202/21/50no=Ek515H6aY+2K8aDDpVAO/4CV3fC4lFSvT7iyRdO0D3i3DHrQlI/pQYnWA1XCwyCh0iMX4oHIsbgZEhLJk+a4NfQt1muoEz1vaKHPe5fMDhBybyrtaihcyspjnaidni/moc.wwl.slanruoj//:ptthmorfdedaolnwoD
shown to have subthreshold BPAD with a range of 0.1 to 2.4%
Participants of expert group on CPG for Bipolar Affective
with a mean of 1.4 (SD-0.8). There is no nationwide study to
Disorder
evaluate the prevalence rates of BPAD in India. In a country
like India, patients have limited resources, poor knowledge
Vidhyadhar Watve, Mrugesh Vaishnav, Vivek Kirpekar,
about the disorder and treatment; have inadequate access
D.K. Sharma, Mahendra Jain, Asim Kumar Mallick,
to the health care facilities, which makes treatment of
C.L. Narayan, Anup Bharti, Madhu Nijhawan.
BPAD a challenge. Indian Psychiatric Society (IPS) made first
attempt to formulate Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) for
INTRODUCTION
management of BPAD in 2005. Since then, over the last one
decade there have been several developments, especially in
Bipolar disorder (BPAD) is a serious mental disorder
the form of emergence of new evidence for some of the
characterized by episodes of depression, hypomania/mania
pharmacological agents. Accordingly, these new guidelines
and mixed episodes, with interepisodic recovery. However,
attempt to update the previous guidelines published by
many patients with BPAD continue to exhibit residual
IPS. These guidelines should be read along with the earlier
symptoms in the interepisodic period. The illness usually
version of the CPGs, published by IPS in 2005.
starts in adolescence or early adulthood and has significant
negative impact on the life of the sufferer and their caregivers.
ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION [TABLE-1]
Patients with BPAD encounter educational difficulties, job
related problems, interpersonal difficulties, psychosocial
Assessment of patients is an ongoing process and
dysfunction, disability, marital problems, multiple suicidal
comprehensive assessment of a patient involves the
attempts, completed suicide and medication side effects.
assessment of patients themselves and their caregivers.
Additionally patients with BPAD have high rates of physical
The role of taking a proper history from the patient and
and psychiatric comorbidity. The prevalence rates of BPAD
all the available resources cannot be over-emphasized. In
vary from country to country. A large multinational study
addition to the history taking, proper attention must be
suggests that lifetime prevalence of BPAD-I ranges from
paid to the mental status examination. Diagnosis of BPAD
0-1% with a mean of 0.6 (SD-0.4). The prevalence rate of
is to be made on the basis of current diagnostic criteria,
BPAD-II ranges from 0 to 1.1% with a mean of 0.4 (SD-0.3).
because a diagnosis based on diagnostic criteria can be
Additionally a significant proportion of patients have been
considered more reliable, facilitates communication among
various clinicians and paves the way for management on the
basis of evidence based recommendations. It is important
Address for correspondence:
to remember that especially during the initial part of the
Dr. Nilesh Shah, Department of Psychiatry, L. T. M. Medical
College and General Hospital, Sion, Mumbai - 400 022, illness, the symptoms may be confusing and at times it
Maharastra, India. may be difficult to distinguish symptoms of mania from
E-mail: drnilshah@hotmail.com, other psychiatric syndromes like schizophrenia, acute
Dr. Sandeep Grover, Additional Professor, Department of
Psychiatry, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.
E-mail: drsandeepg2002@yahoo.com
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Access this article online Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 License, which allows
Quick Response Code others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non-commercially, as long as the
Website: author is credited and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
www.indianjpsychiatry.org For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com
How to cite this article: Shah N, Grover S, Rao GP. Clinical
DOI:
Practice Guidelines for Management of Bipolar Disorder.
10.4103/0019-5545.196974
Indian J Psychiatry 2017;59:51-66.
© 2017 Indian Journal of Psychiatry | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow S51
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
Table 1: Components of assessment and evaluation stressors and biological rhythms in onset of illness,
precipitation of relapse and continuation of symptoms need
Basic assessments
• Comprehensive assessment of both patients and caregivers to be understood thoroughly.
• Complete history with information from all possible sources in terms of
type of first episode in lifetime, predominant polarity of illness, duration A thorough assessment includes assessment of comorbid
and severity of episodes, inter‑episodic recovery, presence or absence of
psychiatric and medical conditions. It is important to
suicidal behaviour, violence and agitation, seasonal variation in onset of
remember that many a times; comorbidity is not very evident
symptoms, presence of rapid cycling and ultra‑rapid cycling features
• History taking focusing on precipitating factors‑ psychosocial stressors, during the acute episode of illness. The comorbid conditions
disturbances in biological rhythms become more evident when the patient has come out of the
• Physical examination‑ record data such as blood pressure, weight and acute episode of the illness. Evaluation of comorbid substance
wherever indicated body mass index and waist circumference
abuse needs to consider the type and frequency of substance
• Mental state examination
abuse. If the patient does not provide adequate information
• Establish diagnosis according to current diagnostic criteria
• Differential diagnosis by ruling out secondary affective disorder about the substance use pattern, but there is high index of
• Proper assessment of the current polarity of the illness suspicion, urine or blood screens (with prior consent) can be
• Evaluate the risk for suicidal behaviour‑ suicidal ideations, intent, plans; used to confirm the existence of comorbid substance use/
access to means for suicide, possible lethality in case patient uses the
dependence, wherever such facilities are available. Functional
means, psychotic symptoms in the form of commanding hallucinations,
impairment in various domains of life including impact of the
severe anxiety, comorbid substance use, past history of suicidal
attempts and non‑suicidal self‑harming, family history of self‑harm and illness on the family functioning and psychosocial impact of
completed suicide the illness on the caregivers is not to be neglected. A thorough
• Areas to be evaluated during the current episode: symptom‑severity, physical examination need to be done to rule out presence of
symptom‑dimensions, comorbid physical and psychiatric including
any physical illness and also to rule out episodes secondary
substance use conditions, risk of harm to self and others, level of
to physical illnesses. This may be supplemented by the
functioning and socio‑cultural milieu of the patient
• Past treatment history: type of medications used, response to treatment, judicious use of investigations. Depending on the feasibility,
duration of use of treatment, side effects experienced and reasons for unstructured clinical assessments need to be supplemented
discontinuation by documentation of severity and extent of symptoms on
• Basic investigations: haemogram, blood sugar and lipid levels, liver
appropriate standardized rating scales. Patients with bipolar
functions, renal functions, electrocardiogram
disorders also have cognitive deficits. Accordingly, depending
• Assessments of caregivers: knowledge about illness, knowledge about
treatment, their attitudes and beliefs regarding treatment, the impact of on the need, detailed cognitive testing may be undertaken.
the illness on them and their personal and social resources in the form of The use of neuroimaging may be indicated in those with
burden, distress, stigma, personal and marital life atypical features, neurological signs, non-response to
• O ngoing assessments: response to treatment, side effects, treatment
treatment and having first episode of illness at a later age
adherence, issues of marriage and pregnancy, disability, other health‑care
and elderly. Caregiver’s assessment may involve evaluation of
needs, ease of access to treatment team, therapeutic alliance, etc.
Additional/Optional assessments their knowledge about illness, knowledge about treatment,
• Use of standardized rating scales to rate various aspects of the illness their attitudes and beliefs regarding treatment, the impact of
• Psychological testing for cognitive functions the illness on them and their personal and social resources
• Neuroimaging especially in those with atypical features, neurological
in the form of burden, distress, stigma, personal and marital
signs, non‑response to treatment, later age of onset and elderly patients
life etc.
and transient psychosis and other psychiatric disorders. In case patient has received treatment in the past, then it is
A possibility of substance induced disorder or disorder important to record the type of medications used, response
secondary to organic causes is to be considered, when to treatment, duration of use of treatment, side effects
the symptoms are atypical or there is evidence of the use experienced and reasons for discontinuation.
of substance or underlying organic causes. Occasionally
establishing the definite diagnosis of BPAD may require Importance of ongoing assessment cannot be
time. underestimated. With progress in treatment, new issues like
response to treatment, side effects, treatment adherence,
The assessment may cover history of number of previous marriage, pregnancy, disability, other health-care needs,
episodes, type of first episode in lifetime, predominant ease of access to treatment team and therapeutic alliance
polarity of illness, duration and severity of episodes, may need to be assessed from time to time.
inter-episodic recovery, presence or absence of suicidal
behaviour, violence and agitation, seasonal variation in FORMULATING A TREATMENT PLAN [FIGURE 1]
onset of symptoms, presence of rapid cycling and features of
ultra-rapid cycling. Assessment of current episode may also Formulation of treatment plan will involve decision making
focus on the issues of severity of symptoms, suicidality and about the treatment setting, treatments to be used and areas
agitation. Understanding the role of various psychosocial to be addressed. Treatment plan need to be formulated in
S52 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
Patient with Affective Symptoms
Consider differential diagnoses like
• Organic Mental Conditions
• Substance induced disorder
• Acute and transient psychotic disorder
• Other psychotic disorders
Establish the diagnosis of BPAD
Assessment
• Severity of Current episode
• Risk of harm to self and others
• Comorbid substance use/dependence
• Level of functioning
• Detailed Physical examination
• Record- blood pressure, weight and wherever indicated body mass index and waist
circumference
• Mental Status Examination
• Investigations- haemogram, liver function test, renal function test, fasting blood glucose
level, electrocardiogram
• Treatment history- response to previous medication trials, compliance, side effects, etc.
• Patient’s and caregivers beliefs about the cause of illness and beliefs about the treatment
• Assessment for social support, stigma, coping
• Assessment of caregiver burden, coping and distress
• Decide about treatment setting- consider inpatient care in case of suicidality, severe agitation
and violence, malnutrition, catatonia, patient unable to care for self to the extent that she/he
requires constant supervision or support, comorbid general medical conditions making
management difficult at the outpatient setting
• Liaison with other specialists depending on the need of the patient
Electroconvulsive therapy Non-Pharmacological
Pharmacological Management
• Catatonia, rapid control Management
• Choose an agent based on the current
of symptoms, suicidality, • Psychoeducation
polarity, presence or absence of psychotic
past response to ECT, • Psychosocial
symptoms in the current episode, past
augmentation etc. intervention
treatment response, past history of side
effects, cost, comorbidity, patient/family
preference, preferred route of
administration, availability of medications,
current metabolic profile, past history of
compliance, treatment resistance
Figure 1: Initial evaluation and management plan for schizophrenia
consultation with patients, caregivers and other members OPTIONS FOR MANAGEMENT OF BIPOLAR
involved in the treatment team. Treatment plans may be DISORDER
guided by the needs and be practical, feasible and flexible.
Further, the treatment plan is be re-evaluated from time to Treatment options for management of BPAD can be broadly
time and be modified as per the needs. classified as mood stabilizers, antidepressants, antipsychotic
medications, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), adjunctive
CHOICE OF TREATMENT SETTINGS medications and psychosocial interventions [Table-2]. Use of
various treatment options is guided by the phase of illness
In general, most of the patients with BPAD are managed (mania/hypomania/depression/mixed) in which patient
on the outpatient setting. However, some patients may presents to the clinician and past treatment history.
require inpatient care. Whenever possible patient admitted
to the inpatient setting should have accompanying family PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT OF
caregivers. In case inpatient care is required and such BIPOLAR DISORDER
facilities are not available, than the patient and/or family
need to be informed about the need for inpatient care and The mainstay of management of BPAD is mood stabilizers.
patient may be referred to the nearest available inpatient The available mood stabilizers include lithium, valproate,
facility and admission may be facilitated. lamotrigine, carbamazepine/oxcarbazepine and topiramate.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S53
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
Lithium meq/litre and for prophylaxis range from 0.6 to 0.8 meq/
Lithium is the oldest mood stabilizer used in the management litre; however, few studies suggest that serum levels as low
of BPAD. It has been found to be efficacious in management as 0.4 to 0.8 meq/litre may be sufficient for prophylaxis,
of acute episode of either polarity and has been found to albeit are associated with higher risk of relapse. Once the
be efficacious in prevention or relapse of episodes of either dose is stabilized, patient may be shifted to once a day
polarity. Additionally, it has been shown to have a role in dose to reduce the side effects and improve the medication
prevention of suicide in patients with BPAD. compliance. Serum lithium levels may be monitored every
3-4 months. Renal function tests need to be monitored
Prior to starting lithium, history need to be reviewed for once in every 2-3 months during the initial 6 months of
the presence of physical illnesses like renal dysfunction, therapy and thyroid function tests need to be monitored
thyroid dysfunction and cardiac conduction abnormalities. once or twice during the first 6 months of treatment.
Additionally information needs to be reviewed for Later, renal and thyroid function tests may be monitored
presence of dermatological diseases. In case of women, once in 6 months to 1 year in clinically stable patients
last menstrual period is to be ascertained and if required
and more frequently if so indicated (see table-3). Lithium
urine pregnancy test need to be done. Further, prior to
is usually preferred in patients who have classical mania,
starting lithium, patients need to be educated about the
bipolar depression, predominant polarity of illness is that
various side effects of lithium, use of salt-restricted diet and
of depression, episodic course of illness, manic-depressive-
avoidance of medications (diuretics, angiotensin-converting
euthymic course, non-rapid cycling course of illness, lack
enzyme inhibitors, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
of mixed episode, older age of onset for BPAD, presence
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, etc.) which can increase
of family history of BPAD and presence of family history of
serum lithium levels. Patients also need to be informed to
lithium response.
avoid dehydration. Whenever lithium is started, it need to
be started in low doses, preferably in divided doses and
Divalproex/valproate
the dose need to be titrated upwards with monitoring
Divalproex and its formulations (sodium valproate
of serum lithium levels. As steady state levels of lithium
and valproic acid) have been found to be useful in the
are achieved after about 5 days of starting lithium or dose
management of BPAD. It has been found to be efficacious
increment, the levels are be done after 5 days of start of
treatment or change in the dose. However, the levels may
Table 3: Investigations prior to starting of lithium and
be checked earlier if patient manifests features of toxicity.
while monitoring lithium therapy
The serum levels of lithium, which are usually required for
management of acute episode, are in the range of 0.6 to 1.0 Pre-lithium evaluation
• Serum Urea, Creatinine
• Serum electrolytes
Table 2: Options for management for Bipolar disorder
• Thyroid function test
Mood Stabilisers • May evaluate serum osmolality
• Lithium • May evaluate 24 hour urine volume, proteins, creatinine, osmolality
• Divalproex/valproate • May calculate the eGFR
• Carbamazepine/Oxcarbazepine • Haemogram
• Lamotrigine • Urine Pregnancy test (in case of women)
• Topiramate • Electrocardiogram
• Gabapentin • Fasting blood sugar
Antidepressants • Lipid Profile
• Tricyclics, Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, Serotonin and • Anthropometry‑ height, weight, waist circumference
nor‑epinephrine reuptake inhibitors, bupropion, mirtazapine, etc. Monitoring of lithium therapy
Antipsychotic medications • During the initial phase of illness, serum lithium levels must be done
• First‑generation antipsychotic medications (Oral/parenteral/depot or after 5 days of a stable dose.
long acting‑ preparations) • Sample for serum lithium levels must be taken 12‑14 hours after the last
• Second‑generation antipsychotic medications (Oral/parenteral/depot or dose of lithium
long acting‑ preparations) • If the medication is being given as BD or TID dose, the morning dose
Somatic treatments need to be withheld prior to collection of blood sample for serum
• Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), transcranial magnetic lithium level
stimulation (rTMS), transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) Monitoring of side effects: at every visit enquire about polyuria/
Adjunctive medications polydipsia, gastrointestinal side effects; Check for tremor, dysarthria,
• Anticholinergics, antidepressants, benzodiazepines, hypnotic‑sedatives, ataxia
anticonvulsants, lithium carbonate Monitoring of serum lithium levels: Once the dose of lithium has been
Psychosocial interventions stabilized the serum levels must be done once in every 3‑4 months; more
• Social rhythm therapy, cognitive behavioural therapy, family frequent monitoring may be done in elderly and those receiving with
intervention, cognitive remediation, individual therapy, group therapy, concurrent medications like diuretics, and in those with renal impairment
social skills training, vocational rehabilitation Investigations to be repeated 6-12 monthly as indicated: 24 hour urine
Other measures volume, urinary proteins, serum urea and creatinine, Thyroid function
• Lifestyle and dietary modifications tests, eGFR, S. Calcium
S54 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
in management of acute mania and mixed episodes. The Table 4: Investigations prior to starting of valproate and
evidence for its efficacy in acute depression is not as robust while monitoring valproate therapy
as that for lithium. It is also efficacious in prevention of
Pre-valproate evaluation
mania and depression, when used during the maintenance • Haemogram
phase. As with lithium, prior to starting valproate, clinicians • Liver Function Test
need to review the medical history for presence of any • Urine Pregnancy test (in case of women)
• Fasting blood sugar
hepatic, haematological and bleeding problems. Prior
• Lipid Profile
to starting of valproate, patient is to be educated about
• Anthropometry
the side effects, especially about signs and symptoms of Monitoring of valproate therapy
hepatic and haematological dysfunction. They need to be Routine monitoring of haemogram and liver function test is not
instructed to report to the clinicians at the earliest if these recommended. May be done every 6‑12 monthly in patients receiving
long term valproate therapy
signs and symptoms emerge. Prior to starting valproate, it
The therapeutic range for serum valproic acid level is 50‑100 µg/mL
is important to investigate the patient for liver function test
Serum valproate levels during initial titration are to be done after 5 days
and haemogram. In young women, last menstrual periods of a stable dose.
need to be ascertained and if required urine pregnancy test When to collect the sample: sample may be collected after 12 hours in
need to be done to rule out pregnancy. As valproate is case patient is receiving immediate release formulation, however, if the
patient is taking extended release formulation, blood sample need to be
associated with weight gain and metabolic abnormalities, it
collected 21‑24 hours after the last dose to estimate the serum valproate
may be a good practice to evaluate the lipid profile, fasting
levels
blood glucose levels and anthropometry (Table-4).
Usually valproate is started in low doses, i.e., 250 mg BD or Table 5: Investigations prior to starting of valproate and
250 mg TID and titrated upwards with monitoring of side while monitoring valproate therapy
effects and serum levels. However, some of the studies Pre-Carbamezapine evaluation
have also evaluated rapid titration of valproate dose with • Haemogram
• Liver Function Test
initial dose of 20-30 mg/day and have shown that it is well
• Urine Pregnancy test (in case of women)
tolerated. Maximum daily dose which is recommended is
• Renal Function test
60 mg/day but most patients do not require such high doses. • Serum electrolytes (in case of elderly)
The usual therapeutic serum levels which are considered to • Fasting blood sugar
be efficacious vary from 50 to 100µg/ml. Once the dose • Lipid Profile
• Anthropometry
of valproate is stabilized, the dosing schedule need to be
Monitoring of carbamazepine therapy
changed to OD or BD dosing to reduce the side effects and
• Monitoring of haemogram including platelet counts and liver function
improve compliance. In case OD dosing is given, extended test need to be done every 2 weekly during the initial 2 months of
release formulation may be used. However, it is important treatment
to remember that the bioavailability of extended release • After first 2 months: if no abnormalities are noted during the first
2 months, than the Haemogram and liver function tests may be done
formulations is about 15% less than the immediate release
every three monthly.
preparations and the dose is to be increased accordingly.
• The therapeutic range for serum carbamazepine level is 4‑12 µg/ml
Serum valproate levels are to be done after 5 days of starting • Serum carbamazepine levels during initial titration are to be done after
or increase in the dose of valproate. The sample need to 5 days of a stable dose.
be collected after 12 hours in case patient is receiving When to collect the sample: sample may be collected after 12 hours of
the last dose
immediate release formulation, however, if the patient is
receiving extended release formulation, the sample may be
collected after 21 to 24 hours (table-5). There is evidence relapse of depression. However, the most dreaded side
to suggest that patients with BPAD-II, dysphoric or mixed effect of lamotrigine includes skin rash, including Stevens
mania, rapid cycling affective disorder, stable episode - Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
frequency, later age of onset of illness, shorter duration of The skin lesions can occur any time during the therapy,
illness, long and severe course of illness respond well to but are more often reported during the initial phase of
valproate. Other indicators for good response to valproate treatment and when used along with valproate. Evidence
include presence of comorbid alcohol use disorder, mental suggests that the risk of skin rash can be reduced by
retardation, anxiety and panic attacks, post-traumatic stress slow upward titration of the dose. Accordingly, while
disorders, marked sleep disturbances, explosive dyscontrol considering lamotrigine, patients need to be informed
and aggression and comorbid migraine. about the possibility of rash and told to contact the
treating psychiatrist in case rash is seen. When the rash
Lamotrigine is more widespread, diffuse and associated with systemic
The role of lamotrigine in management of BPAD has been symptoms like fever or sore throat, lamotrigine may be
well studied now and it has been shown to be efficacious stopped. When initiated, lamotrigine may be started at
in management of bipolar depression and prevention of the dose of 25 mg/day for initial 2 weeks, then it may be
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S55
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
given at the dose of 50 mg/day during the 3rd and 4th week. valproate have been shown to be efficacious in prevention
After that 50 mg/day can be increased per week depending of relapse of both depression and mania. Antipsychotics
on the therapeutic response. like long acting risperidone, ziprasidone have been shown
to be beneficial in prevention of mania as monotherapy or
Carbamazepine as adjunctive medications to lithium or valproate.
Carbamazepine has been shown to be efficacious in the
management of acute bipolar mania and prevention of Combination therapy
relapse. Prior to starting carbamazepine, clinician needs There is evidence to suggest that when lithium or valproate
to focus on the history of blood dyscrasias and hepatic is combined with antipsychotics in the management of acute
dysfunction. When carbamazepine is considered, patients mania, the efficacy is higher and the onset of action is faster
need to be informed about the signs and symptoms of than that reported for single agent. Accordingly, depending
hepatic dysfunction, haematological dysfunction and skin on the severity of mania, combinations may be used.
reactions and told to report to the psychiatrist if these
symptoms emerge. Baseline investigation prior to starting Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
of carbamazepine may include complete haemogram, liver There is evidence for use of ECT in the management of acute
function tests and renal function test (Table-5). When used mania, mixed episode and bipolar depression. Indications
in elderly serum electrolytes may also be done, in view of the for use of ECT are shown in Table-6.
risk of hyponatremia. Usual starting dose of carbamazepine
is 200 mg/day given in divided doses and titrated upward Benzodiazepines
slowly. Once the dose of 800-1000 mg/day is reached the Studies have evaluated the efficacy of adds-on
increment of dose may be slower and the usual maintenance benzodiazepines like clonazepam and lorazepam to lithium
dose is about 1000 mg/day, but it can vary from patient to and current level of evidence suggests that the antimanic
patient and may be 200 to 1600 mg/day. The carbamazepine properties of these agents are difficult to distinguish from
therapeutic drug levels have not been established in patients the sedative properties of these agents. Accordingly, these
with BPAD and the serum levels of 4-12 µg/ml, which is agents are considered to be adjunctive agents, which may
recommended for seizure disorders is commonly used. As be useful in management of acute episode. Further, there is
with lithium and valproate the serum levels need to be done evidence to suggest the beneficial role of lorazepam in the
after 5 days of initiation of treatment or increment of dose. management of agitation and catatonia.
Other anticonvulsants Other agents
There is lack of data in the form of double blind randomized Many other medications like calcium channel blockers,
controlled trials for Oxcarbazepine, but small open label zonisamide, levetiracetam, acamprosate, omega-3 fatty
studies suggests that it may be of some benefit as monotherapy acids, allopurinol etc, have been evaluated in small sample
or add-on therapy in patients with refractory mania. The data size trials as monotherapy or add on agents. However,
from open label studies suggest the usefulness of add-on available the evidence is not sufficient to recommend these
therapy with topiramate in patients with bipolar depression. medications as first line agents in management of bipolar
Studies which have evaluated the role of gabapentin in mania and depression.
management of mania have yielded negative results.
Antidepressants
Antipsychotics Conventionally antidepressants have been used in the
Over the last decade or so, many large multicentric double management of bipolar depression. However, over the last 2
blind placebo controlled and active comparator randomised decades or so, use of antidepressants in patients with bipolar
controlled studies have evaluated the role of various atypical
antipsychotics like olanzapine, quetiapine, aripiprazole,
Table 6: Possible indications of use of ECT in patients of
risperidone, paliperidone, amisulpiride, asenapine,
schizophrenia
ziprasidone and haloperidol etc. in the management of
• Bipolar depression not responding to adequate pharmacotherapy
bipolar depression, bipolar mania and for maintenance
• Bipolar mania not responding to adequate pharmacotherapy
phase treatment. Data from these studies suggest that
• Catatonic symptoms
antipsychotics like olanzapine, quetiapine, aripiprazole, • Need for rapid control of symptoms
risperidone, paliperidone and ziprasidone are effective in • Presence of suicidal behaviour which puts the life of the patient at risk
the management of acute mania. There is evidence for use • Presence of severe agitation or violence which puts the life of others at risk
• Refusal to eat which puts the life of patient at risk
of quetiapine monotherapy, and olanzapine and fluoxetine
• History of good response in the past
combination in the management of bipolar depression.
• Augmentation of partial response to pharmacotherapy
There is evidence for lurasidone in the management of acute • Not able to tolerate pharmacotherapy
episode of bipolar depression. Olanzapine and quetiapine • Treatment resistant illness
monotherapy or as adjunctive medications to lithium or • Episodes of severe depression or mania during pregnancy
S56 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
depression has emerged as a controversial topic in view of Table 7: Basic components of Psychoeducation
the risk of antidepressant-induced manic/hypomanic switch.
• Assessing the knowledge of the patient and caregivers about aetiology,
Evidence from metanalysis suggests that use of antidepressants treatment and prognosis
along with mood stabilizers is superior to use of combination • Introduction of diagnosis
of a mood stabilizer and a placebo and is not associated with • Discussing the symptoms of depression, mania, hypomania and mixed
episodes
increased risk of manic switch. Most of the studies which
• Providing information about aetiology
have not found adds-on antidepressants to be beneficial
• Dealing with day today stress
have involved paroxetine, hence, if one want to avoid use of • Providing information about the importance of stress management and
an antidepressant, paroxetine is to be avoided. Among the regular habits
various antidepressants, bupropion has been reported to be • Providing information about available treatment options, their efficacy/
effectiveness, side effects, duration of use
associated with lowest risk of antidepressant induced switch.
• Discussing about importance of medication and treatment compliance
However, it is important to remember that antidepressants
• Providing information about possible course and long term outcome
should not be used as monotherapy, and in those with rapid • Discussing about problems of substance abuse, marriage and other issues
cycling affective disorder and mixed episodes. • How to detect early signs of relapse
• Discussing about Communication patterns, problem solving, disability
benefits
Adequate trial
• Discussing about relapse and how to identify the early signs of new
The minimum recommended duration of treatment to
episodes
consider it to be an effective trial for an acute manic episode • Improving insight into illness
is about 3-4 weeks. In case of bipolar depression, a 6 weeks • Handling expressed emotions and improving communication
trial is considered as an adequate trial. • Enhancing adaptive coping to deal with persistent/residual symptoms
• Advise for lifestyle and dietary modifications
NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT OF
BIPOLAR DISORDER Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT)
This therapy is based on the theory that circadian rhythms in
Psychosocial management as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy patients with BPAD are vulnerable to external factors and any
has been shown to be of significant benefit during disruption of circadian rhythms can precipitate an episode.
the management of acute phase of bipolar depression Accordingly, it emphasizes on regularizing the social rhythms
and maintenance phase of illness. Among the various or routine of the patient and improving the interpersonal
psychosocial interventions, data supports the use of relationships of the patients so that they can derive more
psychoeducation (individual and group), interpersonal and satisfaction in their social roles. The basic aim is to teach the
social rhythm therapy (IPSRT), cognitive behaviour therapy patient as to how they can prevent the development of a new
and family focused intervention. These psychosocial episode (Table-8). Patients are informed that new episodes
interventions have been shown to be associated with can be precipitated by poor medication adherence, stressful
reduced risk of relapses, better functioning and better life events and disruption of social rhythms. Patients are
treatment adherence. The basic components of all these provided with skills as to how they can address interpersonal
programs involve informing the patients about their illness, problems and issues in the social roles. They are also advised
identifying the early signs of relapse, handling stress, to maintain a regular daily routine and pay attention to the
maintaining social rhythms, addressing the interpersonal day to day stresses which can influence their daily routine
issues and expressed emotions, problem solving and and how they can minimize the impact of these day to day
enhancing medication and treatment adherence. stressors on their daily routine.
Psychoeducation for patients and or family (Table 7) Cognitive Behaviour therapy
Psychoeducation may be considered both for the patient Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) has been shown to be
and family members (Table 7). The aim is to be to efficacious in the management of bipolar depression and
educate the patient and family about the illness. They during the maintenance phase of treatment. The basic
may be provided simple explanations about the nature goals of CBT is to educate the patient about the illness,
of the illness, treatment options, possible side effects of teaching them cognitive behavioural skills for coping with
medications and likely length of treatment etc. Caregivers their illness and psychosocial stressors and problems
may also be provided with an opportunity to vent out their arising out of the same, enhance medication and treatment
feelings and distress. Psychoeducation may also address compliance, monitor the symptoms to prevent relapse.
the important issue of treatment adherence and identifying
early signs of new episode. It is important to remember that Family focused interventions
psychoeducation is not a onetime event and prior to every Family forms an integral part of treatment in Indian setting.
session, feedback of the previous sessions may be taken They are involved in treatment decision making, supervision
and psychoeducation need to be tailored to the needs of of treatment and monitoring of treatment. However, family
the patient and the caregivers. members can also contribute to relapse due to constant
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S57
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
criticism, poor supervision or over-involvement. High Table 8: Basic components of Interpersonal and social
expressed emotion leads to increased risk of relapse and rhythm therapy (IPSRT)
poor outcomes. Studies have shown that family focused
Goals
interventions can reduce the chances of relapse, improve • Stabilize daily routines and sleep/wake cycles
medication adherence and reduce the frequency of • Understand the bi‑directional relationship between moods and
depressive episodes. Family focused interventions help interpersonal events
• Minimize or remove the interpersonal problems related to grief, role
the relatives and patients to integrate the experiences
transitions, role disputes, interpersonal deficits
associated with mood episodes, acknowledging the
Administered in 4 steps
vulnerability of having future episodes, accepting the Step‑1
need to continue with medications, educating the family • Give rationale for IPSRT
about the difference in patients personality and BPAD, • History taking with special focus on understanding the relationship of
episodes with interpersonal problems and social routine
recognising and coping with stress and establishing a
• Assess the patient’s current and past interpersonal relationships
functional relationship (Table-9).
• Educating the patient about bipolar disorder
• Identify interpersonal problem areas to focus, for example grief, role
Advise for life style and dietary modifications transition, role dispute
As it is well known that patients with BPAD are at increased • Agree on a topic to discuss
• Initiating the Social Rhythm Metric (i.e., quantify daily rhythms of life)
risk for cardiovascular mortality and develop metabolic
Step‑2
side effects due to use of psychotropic medications, all
• Help the patient to establish a regular daily routine and resolve
the patients need to be advised about life style and dietary interpersonal problems
measures to reduce the risk of metabolic side effects and • Analyse the communication patterns, identify the problematic
communication patterns, suggesting alternative communication
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. These include
methods, role play
physical exercises, dietary modifications and abstinence
• Maintaining social rhythms
from smoking, alcohol and other substances etc. Step‑3
• In the continuation or maintenance phase encourage the patient to use
Rehabilitation the skills learned in the previous phases of IPSRT
Step‑4
Rehabilitation programmes may be culturally moulded and
• Termination
adapted to the needs of patients and their families.
Treatment adherence Table 9: Basic components of Family focused
Mediation and treatment adherence is very important for interventions
management of patients with BPAD. Available evidence • Assessment of family
suggests that 20-60% of the patients with BPAD become • Psychoeducation about symptoms, early recognition, etiology, treatment,
non-compliant with medication and drop out of treatment. adherence
• Communication skills training ‑ behavioral rehearsal of effective speaking
Hence, all efforts need to be made to enhance the medication
and listening strategies
compliance and treatment adherence. Measures which can
• Accepting that patient is vulnerable for having future episodes
help in improving the compliance are given in table-10. • Able to differentiate between patient’s personality and bipolar disorder
• Recognising and coping with stress
MANAGEMENT OF DIFFERENT PHASES OF • Problem‑solving skills training
• Establishing and maintaining a functional relationship
BIPOLAR DISORDER
Management of BPAD will depend on the phase of illness Table 10: Measures which can improve medication
in which patient presents to the clinician, i.e., bipolar compliance
depression, bipolar hypomania/mania, first episode
• Explain when and how often to take medicines
hypomania/mania, mixed episode or clinical remission. In • Preferably give once a day dosing
addition to the phase of illness, factors which may help • Prescribe minimum number of tablets and medications
in deciding about the pharmacological agent include past • Always ask the patient about kind of formulation (e.g. tablet, capsule etc)
which they would prefer to take
history (number of episodes, type of episodes), comorbidity
• Check the whole prescription to avoid duplication of medication
(comorbid psychiatric/physical disorders, substance
• Explain the patient/family that the beneficial effect will be seen only after
dependence disorder), past treatment history (response, days to weeks of intake of medications.
side effects) and clinical course (rapid cycling), associated • Explain the patient the need to take medication even after feeling better
• Explanation of side effects‑ If patients ask about the side effects, explain
symptoms (presence of psychotic symptoms) etc. In general
the patient about the same.
based on the level of evidence, various pharmacological
• Explain the patient as to what to do‑ if they encounter side effects
treatments are categorised as first line agents, second • Encourage the patient to report side effects
line agents and third line agents. Selection of an agent • The need to consult with psychiatrist before discontinuing medications on
on the basis of current polarity and past history can be of their own
S58 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
benefit, as in most cases, same agent is continued in the Table 11: Management in the acute phase
maintenance phase.
• Comprehensive assessment (psychiatric (including alcohol and
substance)/medical/psychosocial)
The basic principles of management in the acute phase • Discontinue antidepressants if indicated (patient exhibiting hypomanic/
are shown in Table-11. Clinicians may focus on carrying manic/mixed symptoms)
• Deciding on goals of treatment
out a comprehensive assessment (psychiatric/medical/
• Patients
psychosocial), decide about the treatment goals, ensure
‑ Eliminate/reduce symptoms of phase of illness in which patient presents
safety of the patient and others, decide about the treatment with and improve the level of functioning
setting, decide about the choice of medication in liaison ‑ Promote safety, reduce risk of harm, and reduce stress
with the patient and the family by taking into account • Caregivers
‑ Minimise caregiver distress
the clinical and treatment related factors and institute
‑ Offer help to enable them to cope with the illness in their relative
psychosocial interventions at the earliest so as to provide
• Both
comprehensive management. If patient is using alcohol or ‑ D evelop a therapeutic alliance and provide opportunities for patients and
other illicit substance, all efforts are to be made to stop ‑ Caregivers to actively engage in treatment
the same. Similarly, if a patient is on antidepressants and ‑ Offer basic information and support tailored to needs of patients and
caregivers
presents with hypomanic/manic or mixed symptoms, these
• Choice of treatment setting
need to be stopped immediately. Some of the indicators of
• Choice of medication
inpatient care are shown in Table-12. ‑ Type and severity of current episode
‑ Type of past episode (s)
All treatment decisions need to be made in consultation ‑ Predominant polarity
‑ Past treatment history‑ response, side effects, compliance
with the patient and or family members and need to be
• Use of adjunctive medications when indicated
documented. Whenever mood stabilizers are used, the
• Use of ECT when indicated
required investigations need to be done prior to starting • Psychosocial interventions
of mood stabilizers, patient’s serum levels of medications • Planning for further treatment‑ Pharmacoprophylaxis
are to be monitored and other investigations need to be
repeated from time to time as indicated for various mood
Table 12: Some indications for inpatient care during
stabilizers.
acute episodes
Mania/mixed
The evidence for efficacy of various agents in management of
• Presence of severe agitation or violence which puts the life of others at
different phases of illness (mania, depression, maintenance
risk
phase) vary and it is important to be aware of the same.
• Presence of general medical or comorbid psychiatric conditions that
Table-13, provides an update on the available level of make outpatient treatment unsafe or ineffective
evidence for different phases of illness. • Patient not responding to a combination of first line agents
• Treatment‑refractory mania/mixed episode
Depression
MANAGEMENT OF HYPOMANIA/MANIA/
• Presence of suicidal behaviour which puts the life of the patient at risk
MIXED EPISODE
• Presence of severe agitation or violence which puts the life of others at
risk
The goal of management in mania/mixed episode is to • Refusal to eat which puts the life of patient at risk
control the aggression, agitation and disruptiveness of • Severe malnutrition
• Patient unable to care for self to the extent that she/he requires constant
patients at the earliest. Depending of the severity of
supervision or support
symptoms, inpatient care may be considered. If patient is
• Catatonia
on antidepressants then this is to be stopped immediately. • Presence of general medical or comorbid psychiatric conditions that
make outpatient treatment unsafe or ineffective
In terms of pharmacological management, first line agent • Patient not responding to a combination of medications
for management of mania may involve use of lithium or
valproate, olanzapine, haloperidol, quetiapine, aripiprazole, Among these agents, lithium is thought to have slower onset
risperidone, paliperidone or ziprasidone as monotherapy. of action. Accordingly, it can be said that if the mania is
Typical antipsychotics like haloperidol, trifluoperazine and
less severe, monotherapy be considered. However, if mania
chlorpromazine have also been used in the Indian scenario.
is severe and associated with significant disruption than
These are very useful in the management of irritability,
combination therapy need to be considered. Use of adjunctive
aggression, impulsivity and psychotic features. However,
benzodiazepines for short duration may be required.
these are associated with high incidence of extrapyramidal
reactions. However, there is some evidence to suggest that Patients who refuse medications and are unmanageable may
combining lithium or valproate with an antipsychotic may be be given depot antipsychotics like risperidone, paliperidone,
more effective than any of these agents when used alone. olanzapine or a depot of typical antipsychotic medication.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S59
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
Table 13: Comparison of several monotherapy and combination Pharmacotherapies for bipolar disorders
Bipolar Mania Bipolar Depression Mixed episodes Prevention of Prevention of
relapse of depression relapse of mania
Monotherapy
Lithium (Li) √ √ √ √ √
Valproate (V) √ @ √ √ √
Lamotrigine (L) X √ NA √ X
Carbamazepine (C) @ ? X @ @
Oxcarbazepine (O) ? NA NA NA NA
Topiramate (T) X X NA X X
Gabapentin X NA NA X X
Olanzapine (OLZ) √ ? ? √ √
Quetiapine (Q) √ √ NA √ √
Asenapine (ASP) √ NA NA NA ?
Aripiprazole (ARP) √ X ? X √
Risperidone (R) √ NA √ NA @
Paliperidone √ NA ? NA @
Haloperidol @ NA NA NA
Ziprasidone √ X ? NA @
Chlorpromazine ? NA NA NA NA
Clozapine ? NA NA NA NA
Cariprazine NA ? NA NA NA
Lurasidone NA @ NA NA NA
Combination
Li + V √ √ √ √ √
Li + OLZ √ NA NA ? √
Li + R √ NA NA NA √
Li + L NA @ NA NA NA
Li + C NA ? NA NA NA
Li + SSRI NA √ NA NA NA
Li + Venlafaxine NA ? NA NA NA
(Li/V) + ARP ? X NA NA NA
(Li/V) + ASP ? NA NA NA NA
(Li/V) + (Q/ARP/Z) NA NA NA NA √
V + OLZ NA NA ? NA NA
V + SSRI NA √ NA NA NA
OLZ + SSRI NA √ NA √ NA
OLZ + C X NA NA NA NA
R + C X NA NA NA NA
L + Q NA ? NA NA NA
√ – Established efficacy; @ – Efficacy not Established clearly; X – Established that not useful; ? – Evidence limited to open label studies; NA – Evidence not available
If a patient comes with a ‘breakthrough’ hypomanic/manic of patient and family and family focused intervention be
episode, then the first step in the management involves started at the earliest. Psychosocial interventions like CBT
optimization of the ongoing agent. The optimisation can be or IPSRT, focused specifically on the patient, should be
done by monitoring the serum levels of agents like lithium considered when patient is cooperative.
and valproate. If required, additional antipsychotics and
benzodiazepines may be used, depending upon severity of MANAGEMENT OF BIPOLAR DEPRESSION
the episode.
The main goal of management is to achieve euthymia,
If the first-line agent used in optimal dose fails (lack of normal level of functioning and to avoid switching to
significant clinical benefit after 2 weeks of use), another hypomanic/manic episode. Among the various mood
first line agent need to be added to the ongoing treatment. stabilizers, there is ample evidence to suggest that lithium
Alternative strategies may include changing lithium to and lamotrigine may be used as the first line medications in
valproate or vice versa, changing to carbamazepine, adding the management of bipolar depression.
antipsychotic medication if not used earlier, changing
the antipsychotic if used earlier. ECT may be considered If the patient presents with a breakthrough episode, the
if patient is very disruptive, not responding to a trial of initial strategy is to check the medication compliance and
combination of medications, has history of good response ensure adequate compliance. If compliance is not an issue,
to ECT in the past, pregnancy and those experiencing mixed initial strategy is to optimise the mood stabilizer which the
episode. Psychosocial interventions like psychoeducation patient is already getting.
S60 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
If the patient is not on any mood stabilizer, than lithium or Table 14: Risk factors for Rapid Cycling Affective
lamotrigine may be considered. Among the antipsychotics, Disorder
data suggests that quetiapine monotherapy may also be
Risk factors for RCAD
beneficial. There is evidence for use of olanzapine and • Hypothyroidism
fluoxetine combination too. If the patient does not respond • Long term aggressive use of antidepressants
to monotherapy with mood stabiliser or antipsychotics, • Comorbid substance use
• Minor tranquilizer/stimulant or caffeine abuse
combination of these agents with antidepressants may
• Cyclothymic and hyperthymic temperament
be considered. Use of antidepressants without the use of
• Female gender
concurrent mood stabilizer or an atypical antipsychotic is • Menopause
to be avoided. Benzodiazepines may be used as per the • Temporal lobe dysrhythmias
need. Psychosocial intervention in the form of CBT may also • Several episodes/stressors as an effect of kindling
• Onset of illness as depression
be considered when the depression is of mild to moderate
• Frequent and more depressive episodes
severity. ECT may be considered, if depression is severe,
• ? COMT/BDNF gene abnormality
in presence of suicidality, risk of harm to others, catatonic • ? Biological rhythm disturbances like wakefulness, light exposure
symptoms, psychotic symptoms, patient is pregnant, when
use of various psychotropics is limited due to concurrent
side effects. Long acting risperidone has been shown to
medical illnesses. There is preliminary evidence to suggest
be beneficial in prevention of recurrence. Lamotrigine has
the beneficial effect of transcranial magnetic stimulation
been shown to be efficacious in prevention of depressive
and direct cranial stimulation.
episodes, but not for prevention of manic episodes.
Olanzapine, aripiprazole, ziprasidone and asenapine has
RAPID CYCLING AFFECTIVE DISORDER
been shown to be of benefit in prevention of recurrence
of manic episodes, but not for depressive episodes.
Rapid cycling affective disorder (RCAD) is
Carbamazepine has also been shown to be effective in
characterised by having 4 or more episodes
prevention of recurrence; however, it is less preferred
(depression/mania/hypomania/mixed) in a single year. compared to lithium and valproate because of its side effect
These episodes should be separated from each other by profile and drug interactions. Studies have also evaluated
partial or full remission for at least 2 months or a switch the efficacy of lithium and valproate in combination with
to an episode of opposite polarity. Many risk factors various antipsychotics. Besides use of pharmacotherapy,
(Table-14) have been identified for development of there is evidence to suggest the beneficial role of adjunctive
RCAD. Accordingly, the first step in the management of psychosocial intervention in the management of BPAD.
RCAD is to evaluate the patients for underlying medical Maintenance ECT may also be considered in patients who
conditions which may be contributing to the RCAD. Among have responded to ECT during their acute episodes.
medications, use of antidepressants has been shown to
increase cycling. The general principle of management during the
maintenance phase of treatment is to continue the
In terms of psychotropics, there is evidence to suggest that medication started during the acute phase of illness.
lithium or valproate may be used as the first line agents. Accordingly, while selecting the agent during the acute
Other mood stabilizers which can be considered include episode, clinicians may take into consideration the patient’s
lamotrigine. If patient does not respond to monotherapy, preference, clinical factors which may influence the long
then combination of mood stabilizers or a combination term outcome, recurrence of episodes and side effects.
of mood stabilizer and antipsychotic medication may be If the patients have more manic episodes then one may
considered. prefer lithium, valproate or carbamazepine while for more
depressive episodes one may consider Lithium, lamotrigine
MAINTENANCE TREATMENT FOR BIPOLAR or quetiapine. In severe cases, combination of lithium and
DISORDER valproate may be considered.
The primary goal of maintenance treatment is to prevent the It is important to note that patients with mood disorders are
recurrence of episode of either polarity, reduce/eliminate more vulnerable to extrapyramidal side effects like tardive
the residual symptoms and improve the overall functioning dyskinesia with long term use of antipsychotics, especially
of the patient. In terms of pharmaco-therapeutic agents, best typical antipsychotics. Patients who have been treated with
evidence for maintenance treatment is available for lithium a combination of lithium and antipsychotic or valproate and
and valproate. In recent years evidence has also emerged for antipsychotic medication, the need for continued use of
use of olanzapine and quetiapine in prevention of recurrence antipsychotic need to be reassessed on the basis of longitudinal
of both depressive and manic episodes. However, these may course. Similarly, stoppage of antidepressants needs to be
be avoided because of associated higher risk of metabolic considered once bipolar depression remits. Combination
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S61
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
Bipolar Hypomania/Mania/Mixed Episode
Currently on treatment (Breakthrough Currently not on treatment
episode/switch in presence of First line therapy:
antidepressants) • Monotherapy: Lithium, valproate, antipsychotics
• Stop antidepressant- if patient • Combination: Lithium+ antipsychotic/
is getting the same valproate+antipsychotic
• Optimize the dose of the mood • Use Benzodiazepines as per the need
stabilizer which the patient is on • Use of depot antipsychotic may be considered
• If the symptoms do not respond if patient is not willing to take oral medications
to optimisation of the dose or are • ECT: may be considered with monotherapy or
severe, consider adding an combination therapy as per the indication
antipsychotic medication
• Benzodiazepines may be used
depending upon the need
Failure of adequate trial of
first line treatment
Second line therapy:
Monotherapy: Change lithium to lamotrigine or vice
versa
Combination:
• Add antipsychotic if not used
Failure of adequate trial of
• Change from Lithium+ antipsychotic to
first line treatment
valproate+antipsychotic medication
• Change from Valproate+antipsychotic to
lithium+antipsychotic medication
• Continue lithium/valproate and change the
antipsychotic medication
• Consider changing lithium/valproate to carbamazepine
• Use Benzodiazepines as per the need
• Use ECT if not considered earlier
• Consider clozapine if mania is treatment refractory
• Consider other agents
Figure 2: Management of Hypomania/ Mania/Mixed Episode
therapy during the maintenance phase is to be considered guidelines for schizophrenia. The recommendations made for
only for those who have not responded to the optimal dose of monitoring of metabolic side effects associated with various
monotherapy during the maintenance phase of illness. atypical antipsychotics may also be followed in patients with
BPAD, if long term antipsychotic medications are considered.
SPECIAL SITUATIONS
Use of lithium is associated with multiple side effects. These
Clinicians often encounter certain clinical situations which
side effects can be classified on the basis of occurrence (i.e.,
either require special attention or can influence treatment
those occurring during the early or late phase of treatment)
decisions. Management of these situations is summarised
and frequency (Common, uncommon, rare and very rare)
in table-15.
(Table-16). Most of these side effects can be managed with
reduction in dose of medication or shifting to a sustained
SIDE EFFECTS AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
release preparation as the first line strategy.
Various classes of psychotropic medications used for the
management of BPAD are associated with many side effects, The common management strategies for the side effects
which require intervention. The side effects associated associated with lithium, valproate and carbamazepine are
with antipsychotics are discussed in the clinical practice shown in Table-17.
S62 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
Bipolar Depression
Already on treatment Not on treatment
Valproate, Lithium First line therapy:
Olanzapine, Lamotrigine • Monotherapy/combination: Lithium, lamotrigine,
Risperidone, Antipsychotics quetiapine, olanzapine-fluoxetine combination,
other valproate+lithium, valproate+ antidepressant
atypicals • Combination: mood stabiliser/antipsychotics+
antidepressant
• Psychosocial intervention: if depression is
mild to moderate
• ECT: may be considered with monotherapy or
Optimise the Optimise the combination therapy as per the indication
dose dose
• Add antidepressant – bupropion, SSRI
• Add or change to lithium, lamotrigine or quetiapine
• Consider changing from one agent (lithium/lamotrigine/quetiapine) to other
• Consider Valproate along with lithium or antidepressant
• Consider combinations
• Consider psychosocial intervention if the depression is mild to moderate
• Consider ECT as per the indication
• Consider rTMS, tDCS
Figure 3: Management of Bipolar Depression
Table 15: Issues related to special situations
Special Strategies
situation
Suicidality • Risk of suicide is high in patients with BPAD.
• Suicidal behaviour is seen during the depressive episode, mixed episode and also in manic episode. Suicide have also been reported
during the euthymic phase
• Clinicians need to carefully evaluate the patients for suicidal ideations, plans, suicidal attempts at every follow‑up.
• High risk management be instituted and inpatient management may be considered if the patient is at high risk.
• Psychoeducation of patient and family need to focus on discussing about warning signs of suicide. Patients experiencing severe distress
due to a feeling of loss, stigma etc., are to be provided psychological support and monitored closely.
• Use of lithium has been shown to lower the risk of suicide.
• ECT is an important therapeutic option in patients at high risk of suicide during an acute episode.
Catatonia • Catatonic features may be seen in both depressive and manic phase of illness.
• Whenever a patient with BPAD presents with catatonia, all possible differential diagnosis for catatonia need to be considered.
• Investigate to rule out organic cause (s).
• Initial management may involve use of benzodiazepines, especially lorazepam, which leads to symptomatic relief in significant proportion of cases.
• In case the catatonia does not respond to benzodiazepines or relapse after stopping benzodiazepines, ECT is to be considered.
Psychotic • Psychotic symptoms are seen in a significant proportion of patients with BPAD.
features • When present, use of antipsychotics is warranted.
Violence and • All patients, especially those in mania need to be evaluated for violence and dangerousness during every assessment, especially during
Aggression the acute phase of illness.
• Whenever a patient is found to have serious threat for violence or exhibits violence, inpatient management may be considered.
• Injectable antipsychotics like haloperidol or lorazepam can be used for management of violence and aggression.
Comorbid • Substance use can precipitate an episode, increase the frequency of episode, may be associated with RCAD, higher risk for suicide, poor
Alcohol and response to treatment, longer time to achieve remission, can influence the choice of medication, lead to higher vulnerability for side effects.
Substance • Both BPAD and substance use disorders need to be treated concurrently.
use Disorders • Efforts need to be made to keep the patient abstinent from alcohol and other substance(s), both during the acute episodes and during the
maintenance phase of illness.
Comorbid • Patients of BPAD have high rate of comorbid anxiety disorders, ADHD etc.
Psychiatric • Comorbid disorders, may not be evident during the acute episodes. Accordingly, patients need to be evaluated during the maintenance
disorders phase for any kind of comorbid psychiatric disorders.
• Management of comorbid disorders need to be done along with concurrent management of BPAD.
Comorbid • Patients with bipolar disorder have high rate of physical comorbidities.
Physical • All patients need to receive thorough assessment for possible physical illnesses and depending on the feasibility may be investigated as
illnesses per the requirement.
• Those with comorbid physical illnesses are to be continuously monitored during all the phases of treatment.
• Comorbid physical illnesses and concomitant medications also need to be taken into account while selecting the treatment setting and
antipsychotic medication per se.
Contd...
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S63
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
Table 15: Contd...
Special Strategies
situation
Perioperative • When used during the perioperative period, lithium can contribute to hemodynamic instabilities, interfere with sodium and potassium
period metabolism, and the renal excretion of lithium can be reduced in presence of renal complications. Therefore it is recommended that
lithium need to be discontinued prior to surgery.
• Postoperatively, when the patient is hemodynamically stable, is able and allowed to drink, and is not on potentially interfering drugs, the
medication may be restarted gradually.
Pregnancy • Mood stabilizers, including lithium are considered to be teratogenic and associated with higher rate of congenital malformations.
• Pregnancy is to be planned.
• Whenever feasible, exposure to lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, lamotrigine need to be avoided during pregnancy. Hence, attempt
need to be made to discontinue these medications.
• If patient is not able to tolerate the discontinuation of medication, than the pros and cons of continuation of the medications during the
first trimester need to be discussed and documented.
• If required, lithium may be used during second and third trimester of pregnancy; Use the minimal optimal dose.
• If required, antipsychotics, especially high potency typical antipsychotics may be considered.
• Use folic acid during pregnancy.
• If patient is receiving mood stabilizer during the pregnancy – monitor alpha feto‑protein levels at 20 weeks.
Post-partum • There is high risk of relapse during the post‑partum period.
& Breast • The new‑born be evaluated thoroughly, if the mother was on psychotropics during pregnancy for malformations, drug overdose and withdrawal.
feeding • Lithium need to be used with caution during the postpartum.
• When valproate is used during the post‑partum, liver function tests and haemogram of the neonate need to be monitored adequately.
Elderly • Have high rates of comorbid medical illnesses and substance use disorders.
• More sensitive to side effects of medications, at risk for fall and fracture of hip.
• May develop cognitive deficits with use of lithium or benzodiazepines.
• Start low and go slow.
Children & • Have high rates of comorbidity in the form of Attention‑hyperkinetic disorder (ADHD), conduct disorder, substance use disorders.
Adolescents • At times it may be difficult to distinguish between symptoms of mania and ADHD.
• Take longer time to stabilize.
• Data on use of lithium before 12 years of age is not available and use of lithium prior to this age is not recommended.
• Start at lower doses and titrate slowly.
MANAGEMENT OF TOXICITY Table 16: Side effects of lithium
Early onset side effects Common side effects
Among the lithium, valproate and carbamazepine, valproate Weight gain Short term dose related
has a wide therapeutic window. Lithium and carbamazepine Tremor Nausea, diarrhea, epigastric pain
toxicity may be fatal and are medical emergencies. The Anorexia, Nausea, Diarrhea Tremor
Aggravation of cutaneous Thirst, polyuria
therapeutic range for serum lithium levels varies from
conditions Metallic taste
0.4 to 1.2 meq/litre. Toxic effects of lithium are usually
Mild thirst Long term side effects
seen when the serum levels of lithium rise above 1.5meq/ Polyuria Weight gain
litre. When the levels exceed 2meq/litre, life threatening Late onset side effects Hypothyroidism in women
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus Reduction in eGFR
side effects may emerge. Various signs and symptoms
Hypothyroidism Tubular dysfunction
of toxicity with lithium, valproate and carbamazepine
Thyroiditis Uncommon side effects
are shown in Table-18.Management of lithium toxicity Hyperthyroidism Fluid retention (oedema)
is an acute emergency and involves stoppage of lithium, Cognitive dulling Hypothyroidism
maintaining the airways, maintaining an intravenous line Rare side effects
Acne
and use of haemodialysis if serum lithium levels are more
Psoriasis
than 2.5 mEq/Litre. However, in patients with end stage Hair loss
renal disease, haemodialysis may be considered in levels Fatigue
below 2.5mEq/litre as well. Arrhythmia
Cognitive deficit
Seizures
Management of valproate toxicity also involve use of
Sexual side effects
haemodialysis. However, there are no clear guidelines for Very Rare side effects
the same. Management of carbamazepine intoxication ↑WBC count
involves gastric lavage, hemoperfusion and use of supportive ↑serum Ca++, Mg++
↑ parathyroid hormone
measures.
↑blood sugar
Benign intracranial hypertension
Financial support and sponsorship Parkinsonism disease’s like
Nil. symptoms
S64 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
Table 17: Management of side effects of mood stabilizers
Side effects Management
Lithium
Dose-related side effects: polyuria, polydipsia, weight gain, Reduce the dose and/or shift to once a daily dose of medications, if the side effects
cognitive problems (e.g., dulling, impaired memory, poor still persist than use other medications:
concentration, confusion, mental slowness), tremor, sedation Tremors: beta‑blockers
or lethargy, impaired coordination, gastrointestinal distress Polyuria, polydipsia, edema: diuretics
(e.g., nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, diarrhoea), hair loss, benign Acne: Topical antibiotics, retinoic acid
leukocytosis, acne, and edema Gastrointestinal side effects: give lithium after meals, change to lithium citrate
Electrocardiogram (ECG) Changes Cardiac Side effects: Reduce the dose, if the abnormalities persist, may have to stop
lithium in consultation with the cardiologist depending on the severity of the cardiac
conduction abnormalities
Renal Side effects: Impaired concentrating capacity, interstitial Renal side effects: Diuretics for impaired concentrating capacity‑ thiazides, amiloride
fibrosis, tubular atrophy
Hypothyroidism Hypothyroidism: Not an indication for stopping lithium, add levothyroxine
Dermatological: Reduce the dose, appropriate dermatological treatment, if does not
respond then may consider stopping lithium
Psoriasis Inositol supplementation, TNF α inhibitors (Etanercept), Conventional treatment of
Psoriasis (Topical corticosteroids, Keratolytics, Vitamin D analogues, Oral retinoids,
Psoralen, Ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy , Methotrexate)
May have to consider stopping lithium in treatment resistant cases of psoriasis
Valproate
Dose‑related side effects: Gastrointestinal distress (nausea, Resolve with reduction in dose, if persist, then
vomiting, diarrhoea etc), tremor, sedation, benign hepatic GI disturbances: change of preparation from Valproic acid to Divalproex,
transaminase elevations Proton‑pump blockers, Histaminic blockers
Tremors: beta‑blockers
Hepatotoxicity Discontinuation of valproate
Leukopenia, Thrombocytopenia Discontinuation of valproate
Hair loss, increased appetite, weight gain Dietary restriction for increased appetite and weight gain
Polycystic ovarian disease May have to discontinue valproate if other options are available, metformin
Hepatic failure, haemorrhagic pancreatitis, and Discontinuation of valproate
agranulocytosis
Carbamazepine
Ophthalmological: diplopia, blurred vision Reduce the dose
Gastrointestinal: nausea Reduce the dose
Neurological: ataxia Reduce the dose
Dermatological: skin rashes Reduce/Stop Carbamazepine
Haematological: leukopenia, thrombocytopenia Mild leukopenia may resolve on its own, in case of severe leukopenia, stop the
medication
Electrolyte imbalance: Hyponatremia May require discontinuation of carbamazepine
Endocrine: hypothyroidism May require addition of levothyroxine
Serious side effects: agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, Stop Carbamazepine, manage the medical condition
thrombocytopenia, hepatic failure,
Stevens‑Johnson syndrome, pancreatitis
Table 18: Signs and symptoms of Toxicity of lithium, Table 18: Contd...
valproate and Carbamazepine Carbamazepine
Lithium levels 1.5‑2‑5 meq/litre Dizziness, Ataxia, Sedation, Nystagmus, Ophthalmoplegia, Cerebellar
Neurological: Fine tremors, Apathy, Fatigue, Muscle weakness, and extrapyramidal signs, Impaired consciousness, Seizures, Respiratory
depression, Stupor, Coma, Tachycardia, Arrhythmia, Cardiac conduction
Hyperreflexia, Incontinence, Gait disturbances
disturbances, Hypotension
Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea
Cardiovascular changes: Bradycardia, T‑wave changes, sinoatrial block, AV
block
Conflicts of interest
Lithium levels >2.5 meq/litre
Neurological: course tremors, slurring of speech, dysarthria, ataxia, There are no conflicts of interest.
hypertonia, spasticity, rigidity, myoclonus, seizures, stupor, coma,
permanent neurological deficits REFERENCES
Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea
Cardiovascular changes: bradycardia, T‑wave changes, sinoatrial block,
1. Merikangas KR, Jin R, He JP et al. Prevalence and correlates of bipolar
AV block, hypotension
spectrum disorder in the world mental health survey initiative. Arch Gen
Renal: Renal failure Psychiatry 2011; 68: 241–251.
Valproate 2. Sidor MM, Macqueen GM. Antidepressants for the acute treatment
Somnolence, Heart block, Coma of bipolar depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin
Psychiatry 2011; 72: 156–167.
Contd.. 3. Grunze H, Vieta E, Goodwin GM, Bowden C, Licht RW, Möller HJ,
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S65
Shah, et al.: CPGs for bipolar disorders
& Kasper S. The World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry 23. De Berardis D, Marini S, Carano A, Padovan Lang A, Cavuto M, Piersanti M,
(WFSBP) guidelines for the biological treatment of bipolar disorders: Di Giannantonio M. Efficacy and safety of long acting injectable atypical
update 2012 on the long-term treatment of bipolar disorder. The World antipsychotics: a review. Current clinical pharmacology, 2013; 8(3),
Journal of Biological Psychiatry 2013; 14(3), 154-219. 256-264.
4. Yatham LN, Kennedy SH, Parikh SV, Schaffer A, Beaulieu S, Alda M, 24. Chou YH, Chu PC, Wu SW, Lee JC, Lee YH, Sun IW, Yen YC. A Systemic
Berk M. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) Review and Experts’ Consensus for Long-acting Injectable Antipsychotics
and International Society for Bipolar Disorders (ISBD) collaborative in Bipolar Disorder. Clinical Psychopharmacology and Neuroscience,
update of CANMAT guidelines for the management of patients with bipolar 2015; 13(2), 121.
disorder: update 2013. Bipolar disorders; 2013;15(1), 1-44. 25. Joffe RT, MacQueen GM, Marriott M, Robb J, Begin H, Young LT. Induction
5. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Bipolar disorder: The of mania and cycle acceleration in bipolar disorder: effect of different
assessment and management of bipolar disorders in adults, children and classes of antidepressant. ActaPsychiatricaScandinavica, 2002;105(6),
young people in primary and secondary care. Draft for consultation, April 427-430.
2014. http://www.nice.org.uk/ 26. Thase ME, Sachs GS.. Bipolar depression: pharmacotherapy and related
6. American Psychiatric Association. Guideline Watch: Practice guideline for therapeutic strategies. Biological psychiatry, 2000; 48(6), 558-572.
the treatment of patients with bipolar disorder, 2ndedn. Washington DC: 27. Gijsman HJ, Geddes JR, Rendell JM, Nolen WA, Goodwin GM.
American Psychiatric Association; 2005. Antidepressants for bipolar depression: a systematic review of randomized,
7. Goodwin GM. Evidence –based guidelines for treating bipolar disorder: controlled trials. American Journal of Psychiatry 2014; 161: 1537-47.
revised second edition- recommendations from the British Association for 28. Henry C, Sorbara F, Lacoste J, Gindre C, Leboyer M. Antidepressant-induced
Psychopharmacology. J Psychopharmacol 2009; 23:346-388. mania in bipolar patients: identification of risk factors. Journal of Clinical
8. Cipriani Andrea, et al. “Comparative efficacy and acceptability of antimanic Psychiatry, 2001; 62(4), 249-255.
drugs in acute mania: a multiple-treatments meta-analysis.” The Lancet 29. TohenM, Vieta E, Calabrese J, Ketter TA, Sachs G, Bowden C,Breier
378.9799 (2011): 1306-1315. A. Efficacy of olanzapine and olanzapine-fluoxetine combination in the
9. Fountoulakis KN, Kontis D, Gonda X, Yatham LN. A systematic review of treatment of bipolar I depression. Archives of general psychiatry, 2003;
the evidence on the treatment of rapid cycling bipolar disorder. Bipolar 60(11), 1079-1088.
disorders; 2013; 15(2), 115-137. 30. McElroy SL. Prescribing antidepressants for bipolar depression: what
10. Rao PG. An overview of Indian research in bipolar mood disorder. Indian does the evidence say?.The Journal of clinical psychiatry, 2014; 75(9),
Journal of Psychiatry. 2010;52(Suppl1):S173-S177. e24-e24.
11. Avasthi A, Grover S, Aggarwal M. Research on mood stabilizers in India. 31. Silverstone T. Moclobemide vs. imipramine in bipolar depression: a
Indian J Psychiatry 2010;52, Suppl S3:355-61 multicentre double฀blindclinical trial. ActapsychiatricaScandinavica,
12. Grover S, Avasthi A, Sinha V, Lakdawala B, Bathla M, Sethi S, 2001; 104(2), 104-109.
Mathur D M, Kathuria P, Shah S, Baalasubramanian D S, Agarwal V, Deka 32. Nivoli AM, Colom F, Murru A, Pacchiarotti I, Castro-Loli P,
K. Indian Psychiatric Society multicentric study: Prescription patterns of González-Pinto A,Vieta E. New treatment guidelines for acute bipolar
psychotropics in India. Indian J Psychiatry 2014;56:253-64 depression: a systematic review. Journal of affective disorders, 2011;
13. Grover S, Avasthi A. Mood stabilizers in pregnancy and lactation. Indian J 129(1), 14-26.
Psychiatry 2015;57, Suppl S2:308-23 33. Vázquez GH, Tondo L, Undurraga J, Baldessarini RJ. Overview of
14. Tighe SK, Mahon PB, Potash JB. Predictors of Lithium Response in Bipolar antidepressant treatment of bipolar depression. International Journal of
Disorder. Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease. 2011; 2(3):209-226. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2013; 16(7), 1673-1685.
15. Cipriani A, Hawton K, Stockton S, & Geddes JR. Lithium in the prevention of 34. Schöttle D, Huber CG, Bock T, Meyer TD. Psychotherapy for bipolar
suicide in mood disorders: updated systematic review and meta-analysis. disorder: a review of the most recent studies. Current opinion in psychiatry,
BMJ. 2013; 346:f3646. 2011; 24(6), 549-555.
16. Malhi GS, Tanious M. Optimal frequency of lithium administration in the 35. Scott JAN, Paykel E, Morriss R, Bentall R, Kinderman P, Johnson T,
treatment of bipolar disorder: clinical and dosing considerations. CNS Hayhurst H. Cognitive–behavioural therapy for severe and recurrent
Drugs 2011; 25(4): 289-98. bipolar disorders. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 2006; 188(4),
17. Ng F, Hallam K, Lucas N, Berk M. The role of lamotrigine in the management 313-320.
of bipolar disorder. Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment, 2007; 3(4), 463. 36. Miklowitz DJ. A review of evidence-based psychosocial interventions for
18. Bowden, C. L., Asnis, G. M., Ginsberg, L. D., Bentley, B., Leadbetter, R., bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 2006; 67, 28.
& White, R. Safety and tolerability of lamotrigine for bipolar disorder. Drug 37. Chanpattana W. Combined ECT and clozapine in treatment-resistant
safety, 2004; 27(3), 173-184. mania. J ECT 2000; 16:204-207.
19. Tränkner A, Sander C, Schönknecht P. (2013). A critical review of the 38. Devanand DP, Polanco P, Cruz R, Shah S, Paykina N, Singh K, and Majors
recent literature and selected therapy guidelines since 2006 on the use L: The efficacy of ECT in mixed affective states. J ECT 2000; 16:32-37.
of lamotrigine in bipolar disorder. Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment, 39. Mukherjee S, Sackeim HA, Schnur DB. Electroconvulsive therapy of acute
2013; 9, 101. manic episodes: a review of 50 years’ experience. Am J Psychiatry 1994;
20. Tohen M, Zhang F, Taylor CC, Burns P, Zarate C, Sanger T, Tollefson, G. A 151:169-176.
meta-analysis of the use of typical antipsychotic agents in bipolar disorder. 40. Ismail Shihabuddeen TM, Gopinath PS. Group meetings of caretakers
Journal of affective disorders, 2001; 65(1), 85-93. of patients with schizophrenia and bipolar mood disorders. Indian J
21. Gao K, Gajwani P, Elhaj O, Calabrese JR. Typical and atypical Psychiatry 2005;47:153-6.
antipsychotics in bipolar depression. The Journal of clinical psychiatry, 41. Durgam S, Starace A, Li D, Migliore R, Ruth A, Németh G, Laszlovszky I.
2005; 66(11), 1376-1385. The efficacy and tolerability of cariprazine in acute mania associated with
22. Gigante AD, Lafer B, Yatham LN. Long-acting injectable antipsychotics for bipolar I disorder: a phase II trial. Bipolar Disord. 2015;17:63-75.
the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder. CNS drugs, 2012; 26(5), 42. Muneer A. The Treatment of Adult Bipolar Disorder with Aripiprazole: A
403-420. Systematic Review. Cureus. 2016 Apr; 8(4): e562.
S66 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017