Downloadedfromhttp://journals.lww.com/indianjpsychiatrybyBhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE=on05/12/2022
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of Depression
Shiv Gautam, Akhilesh Jain1, Manaswi Gautam2, Vihang N. Vahia3, Sandeep Grover4
Director Professor, Director, Gautam Hospital & Research Center, Consultant Psychiatrist Gautam Hospital and Research
Center, 1Specialist Psychiatry ESI Hospital, 2Gautam Hospital and Research Center and Gautam Institute of Behavioural
Sciences and Alternative Medicine, Jaipur, 3Consultant Psychiatrist, Gaur Medical Health Clinic, Ajmer, 4Additional
Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India
2202/21/50no=Ek515H6aY+2K8aDDpVAO/4CV3fC4lFSvT7iyRdO0D3i3DHrQlI/pQYnWA1XCwyCh0iMX4oHIsbgZEhLJk+a4NfQt1muoEz1vaKHPe5fMDhBybyrtaihcyspjnaidni/moc.wwl.slanruoj//:ptthmorfdedaolnwoD
ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION (table-1)
Participants of expert group on CPG for Depression
Management of depression involves comprehensive
Gautam Saha, I.D Gupta, Navendu Gaur, Tushar Jagawat,
assessment and proper establishment of diagnosis. The
Anita Gautam, T. S Sathyanarayana Rao
assessment must be based on detailed history, physical
examination and mental state examinations.History must be
INTRODUCTION
obtained from all sources, especially the family. The diagnosis
must be recorded as per the current diagnostic criteria.
Depression is a common disorder, which often leads to
poor quality of life and impaired role functioning. It is
Depression often presents with a combination of
known to be a major contributor to the global burden
symptoms of depressed mood, loss of interest or pleasure,
of diseases and according to World Health Organization
decreased energy and fatigue, reduced concentration
(WHO), depression is the fourth leading cause of disability
and attention, reduced self-esteem and self-confidence,
worldwide and it is projected that by 2020, it will be
ideas of guilt and unworthiness, bleak and pessimistic
the second most common leading cause of disability.
views of the future, ideas or acts of self-harm or suicide,
Depression is also associated with high rates of suicidal
disturbed sleep and diminished appetite. Depending on
behaviour and mortality. When depression occurs in the
the severity of depression some of these symptoms may
context of medical morbidity, it is associated with increased
be more marked and develop characteristic features that
health care cost, longer duration of hospitalization, poor
are widely regarded as having special clinical significance.
cooperation in treatment, poor treatment compliance and
These symptoms are known as somatic symptoms of
high rates of morbidity. Depression is also known to be
depression and include symptoms of loss of interest or
associated with difficulties in role transitions (e.g., low pleasure in activities that are normally enjoyable, lack of
education, high teen child-bearing, marital disruption, emotional reactivity to normally pleasurable surroundings
unstable employment) and poor role functioning (e.g., and events, waking up in the morning 2 hours or more
low marital quality, low work performance, low earnings). before the usual time, depression worse in the morning,
It is also reported to be a risk factor for the onset and objective evidence of definite psychomotor retardation
persistence of a wide range of secondary disorders. or agitation (remarked on or reported by other people),
Available data also suggests that between one-third marked loss of appetite, weight loss (often defined as 5%
and one-half of patients also experience recurrence of or more of body weight in the past month) and marked
depressive episodes. loss of libido. It is important to note that for the diagnosis
of depressive disorder these symptoms need to be present
Address for correspondence: for at least 2 weeks and need to be associated with
Dr. Sandeep Grover, Additional Professor, Department of
psychosocial dysfunction.
Psychiatry, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.
E-mail: drsandeepg2002@yahoo.com
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Access this article online Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 3.0 License, which allows
Quick Response Code others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, as long as the
Website: author is credited and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
www.indianjpsychiatry.org For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com
How to cite this article: Gautam S, Jain A, Gautam M,
DOI:
Vahia VN, Grover S. Clinical Practice Guidelines for the
10.4103/0019-5545.196973
management of Depression. Indian J Psychiatry 2017;59:34-50.
S34 © 2017 Indian Journal of Psychiatry | Published by Wolters Kluwer ‑ Medknow
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Table 1: Components of assessment and evaluation Some of the patients with depression may present with
predominant complaints of aches, pains and fatigue and
Basic assessments
• Complete history with information from all possible sources they may not report sadness of mood on their own. A careful
• Physical examination‑ look for thyroid swelling, evidence for evaluation of these patients often reveals the underlying
malnutrition or any specific nutritional deficiency features of depression. However, it is important to note that
• Record blood pressure, weight and wherever indicated body mass index
many patients with depression will also have associated anxiety
and waist circumference
symptoms. With increasing severity of depression patients may
• Mental state examination
• Establish diagnosis according to current diagnostic criteria report psychotic symptoms and may also present with catatonic
• Differential diagnosis by ruling out secondary depression features. Thorough assessment also ought to focus on evaluation
• Rule out bipolar disorder, premenstrual dysphoric disorder for comorbid substance abuse/dependence. Careful history of
• Assess the severity, specifier, subtype of depression
substance intake need to be taken to evaluate the relationship
• Areas to be evaluated: symptom‑severity,
of depression with substance intoxication, withdrawal and
symptom‑dimensions (psychotic symptoms, catatonic symptoms,
melancholic symptoms, reverse vegetative symptoms and cognitive abstinence. Whenever required appropriate tests like, urine or
symptoms), comorbid physical, psychiatric and substance use blood screens (with prior consent) may be used to confirm the
conditions, risk of harm to self and others, level of functioning and existence of comorbid substance abuse/dependence.
socio‑cultural milieu of the patient
• Basic investigations: haemogram, blood sugars and lipid levels, liver
Many physical illnesses are known to have high rates of
functions, renal functions, thyroid function test (if indicated)
• Assessments of caregivers: knowledge and understanding of the illness, depression. In some situations the physical illnesses have
attitudes and beliefs regarding treatment, impact of the illness on them, causative role in development of depression, whereas in other
personal and social resources
situations the relationship/co-occurrence is due to common
• Ongoing assessments: response to treatment, side effects, treatment
etiology. Some of the physical illnesses commonly associated
adherence, the impact of patient’s immediate environment, disability
assessments, other health‑care needs, ease of access and relationship with depression are listed in Table-2. When depression
with the treatment team occurs in relation to physical illness attempt may be made
Additional/Optional assessments to clearly delineate the symptoms of depression and physical
• Use of standardized rating scales to rate all aspects of the illness illness. Further, while making the diagnosis, it maybe clearly
• Neuroimaging especially in those with first‑episode of depression seen mentioned as to which diagnostic approach [i.e., inclusive
in late or very late age; those have neurological signs, those having
approach (symptoms are counted whether or not they might be
treatment resistant depression
attributable to physical illness), substitute approach (nonsomatic
symptoms are substituted with somatic symptoms), exclusive
Table 2: Some of the physical illnesses commonly approach (somatic symptoms are deleted from the diagnostic
associated with depression criteria) or best estimate approach] was followed. Further,
• Epilepsy • Disease while reviewing the treatment history of medical illnesses,
• Post stroke • Depression in Malignancy medication induced depression must be kept in mind, as
• Parkinson’s Disease • Hypothyroidism
many medications are known to cause depression (Table-3).
• Multiple Sclerosis • Hyperthyroidism
• Degenerative Brain Disease • Hyperparathyroidism
• Alzheimer’s Disease • Cushing’s Syndrome It is always important to take the longitudinal life course
• Coronary Artery • Addison’s disease perspective into account to evaluate for previous episodes
• Diabetes mellitus and presence of symptoms of depression amounting to
Table 3: Medications known to cause depression
Cardiovascular drugs Azathioprine Ampicillin Penicillin G Benzodiazepines Efavirenz
ACE inhibitors Bleomycin Chloramphenicol procaine Chloral hydrate Enfuvirtide
Calcium channel Cisplatin Methylphenidate (Ritalin) Streptomycin Ethanol Saquinavir
blockers Cyclophosphamide Chloroquine Sulfonamides Other drugs Zidovudine
Clonidine Doxorubicin Clofazimine Tetracycline Choline Anticonvulsants
Digitalis Vinblastine Cycloserine Trimethoprim Cimetidine Ethosuximide
Guanethidine Vincristine Cyclosporine Hormones Disulfiram Phenobarbital
Hydralazine Antiparkinsonian Dapsone Adrenocorticotropin Lecithin Phenytoin
Methyldopa drugs Ethambutol Anabolic steroids Methysergide Primidone
Procainamide Amantadine Ethionamide Glucocorticoids Phenylephrine Tiagabine
Propranolol Bromocriptine Foscarnet Oral contraceptives Physostigmine Vigabatrin
Reserpine Levodopa Ganciclovir Antipsychotic drugs Ranitidine Anti‑inflammatory
Thiazide diuretics Stimulants Griseofulvin Fluphenazine Statins agents
Guanabenz Amphetamines Isoniazid Haloperidol Tamoxifen NSAIDS
Zolamide diuretics withdrawal) Metoclopramide Sedatives and Antiretroviral drugs
Chemotherapeutics Caffeine Metronidazole antianxiety Atazanavir
6‑Azauridine Cocaine (withdrawal) Nalidixic acid drugs
Asparaginase Anti-infective agents Nitrofurantoin Barbiturates
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S35
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
dysthymia. Evaluation of history also takes into consideration induced switch. Presence of psychotic features, marked
the relationship of onset of depression with change in psychomotor retardation, reverse neurovegetative
season (seasonal affective disorder), peripartum period and symptoms (excessive sleep and appetite), irritability of
phase of menstrual cycle. Further, the longitudinal course mood, anger, family history of bipolar disorder and early
approach may also take into account response to previous age of onset need to alert the clinicians to evaluate for the
treatment and whether the patient achieved full remission, possibility of bipolar disorder, before concluding that they
partial remission and did not respond to treatment. are dealing with unipolar depression.
An important aspect of diagnosis of depression is to rule Area to be covered in assessment include symptom
out bipolar disorder. Many patients with bipolar disorder dimensions, symptom-severity, comorbid psychiatric and
present to the clinicians during the depressive phase of medical conditions, particularly comorbid substance abuse,
illness and spontaneously do not report about previous the risk of harm to self or others, level of functioning and
hypomanic or manic episodes. Careful history from the the socio-cultural milieu of the patient.
patient and other sources (family members) often provide
important clues for the bipolar disorder. It is often useful to In case patient has received treatment in the past, it is
use standardized scales like mood disorder questionnaire to important to evaluate the information in the form of type of
rule out bipolarity. Treating a patient of bipolar depression antidepressant used, dose of medication used, compliance
as unipolar disorder can increase the risk of antidepressant with medication, reasons for poor compliance, reasons for
Patient with Depressive features
Consider differential diagnoses like
• Organic Depression, medication induced depression,
substance induced depression, premenstrual dysphoric
disorder
• Rule out bipolar disorder
Establish the diagnosis of Depression
Assessment
• Severity of illness
• Risk of harm to self and others- current suicidal ideations, suicidal attempts;
past history of non-suicidal self-harm behaviour, past history of suicidal attempts,
severity of attempt
• Comorbid substance use/dependence
• Personality factors
• Level of functioning- work dysfunction
• Detailed Physical examination- thyroid swelling, evidence for nutritional deficiency,
and physical illness which could contribute to depression
• Record- blood pressure, weight and wherever indicated body mass index and waist
circumference
• Mental Status Examination
• Investigations- haemogram, liver function test, renal function test, fasting blood glucose level,
thyroid function test (if required), Urine pregnancy test (if required)
• Treatment history- response to previous medication trials, compliance, side effects, etc.
• Patient’s and caregivers beliefs about the cause of illness and beliefs about the treatment
• Assessment for social support, stigma, coping
• Assessment of caregiver burden, coping and distress
• Decide about treatment setting- consider inpatient care in case of suicidality, malnutrition,
catatonia, comorbid general medical conditions making management difficult at the
outpatient setting
• Liaison with other specialists depending on the need of the patient
Pharmacological Management Electroconvulsive therapy Non-Pharmacological
• Choose an antidepressant based on past • Catatonia, suicidality, Management
treatment response, past history of side severe depression, past • Psychoeducation
effects, cost, comorbidity, patient/family response to ECT, • Psychotherapeutic
preference, availability augmentation etc. intervention
Figure 1: Initial evaluation and management plan for Depression
S36 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
discontinuation of medication, response to treatment, side at the outpatient setting. However, some patients have
effects experienced etc. If the medications were changed, severe depression which may be further associated with
then the reason for change is also to be evaluated. psychotic symptoms, catatonic symptoms, poor physical
health status, suicidal or homicidal behaviour etc. In such
Wherever possible, unstructured assessments need to be cases, careful evaluation is to be done to decide about the
supplemented by ratings on appropriate standardized treatment setting and whenever necessary inpatient care
rating scales. Depending on the need, investigations may be offered. In general, the rule of thumb is that the
need to be carried out. The use of neuroimaging may be patients may be treated in the setting that is most safe and
indicated in those with first-episode of depression seen in
effective. Severely ill patients who lack adequate social
late or very late age; those have neurological signs, those
support outside of a hospital setting may be considered
having treatment resistant depression.
for admission to a hospital whenever feasible. The optimal
treatment setting and the patient’s ability to benefit
Besides, patients, information about the illness need to be
from a different level of care may be re-evaluated on an
obtained from the caregivers too and their knowledge and
ongoing basis throughout the course of treatment. Some
understanding of the illness, their attitudes and beliefs
of the common indications for inpatient care are shown
regarding treatment, the impact of the illness on them and
in Table-4.
their personal and social resources need to be evaluated.
Table 4: Some indications for inpatient care during
FORMULATING A TREATMENT PLAN (FIGURE-1)
acute episodes
Formulation of treatment plan involves deciding about • Presence of suicidal behaviour which puts the life of the patient at risk
• Refusal to eat which puts the life of patient at risk
treatment setting, medications and psychological treatments
• Severe malnutrition
to be used. Patients and caregivers may be actively consulted
• Catatonia
while preparing the treatment plan. A practical, feasible and • Presence of general medical or comorbid psychiatric conditions that make
flexible treatment plan can be formulated to address the needs outpatient treatment unsafe or ineffective
of the patients and caregivers. Further the treatment plan can
be continuously re-evaluated and modified as required. All inpatients should have accompanying family caregivers.
In case inpatient care facilities are not available, than the
EVALUATE THE SAFETY OF PATIENT AND patient and/or family need to be informed about such a
OTHERS
need and admission in nearest available inpatient facility
can be facilitated.
A careful assessment of the patient’s risk for suicide should
be done. During history inquiry for the presence of suicidal
THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ideation and other associated factors like presence of
psychotic symptoms, severe anxiety, panic attacks and
Irrespective of the treatment modalities selected for
alcohol or substance abuse which increases the risk of suicide
patients, it is important for the psychiatrist to establish a
need to be evaluated. It has been found that severity of
therapeutic alliance with the patient. A strong treatment
depressive symptomatology is a strong predictor of suicidal
alliance between patient and psychiatrist is crucial for poorly
ideation over time in elderly patients. Evaluation also includes
motivated, pessimistic depressed patient who are sensitive
history of past suicide attempts including the nature of those
to side effect of medications. A positive therapeutic alliance
attempts. Patients also need to be asked about suicide in their
always generates hope for good outcome.
family history. During the mental status examinations besides
enquiring about the suicidal ideations, it is also important to
ENHANCED TREATMENT COMPLIANCE
enquire about the degree to which the patient intends to act
on the suicidal ideation and the extent to which the patient has
The successful treatment of major depressive disorder
made plans or begun to prepare for suicide. The availability
requires adequate compliance to treatment plan. Patients
of means for suicide be inquired about and a judgment may
with depressive disorder may be poorly motivated and
be made concerning the lethality of those means. Patients
who are found to possess suicidal or homicidal ideation, unduly pessimistic over their chances of recovery with
intention or plans require close monitoring. Measures such as treatment. In addition, the side effect or requirements of
hospitalization may be considered for those at significant risk. treatment may lead to non-adherence. Patients are to be
encouraged to articulate any concern regarding adherence
CHOICE OF TREATMENT SETTINGS and clinicians need to emphasize the importance of
adherence for successful treatment. Simple measures
Majority of the cases of depression seen in the clinical which can help in improving the compliance are given in
setting are of mild to moderate severity and can be managed table-5.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S37
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
ADDRESS EARLY SIGNS OF RELAPSE be educated about the risk of relapse. They can be educated
to identify early signs and symptoms of new episodes. Patients
Many patients with depression experience relapse. can also be asked to seek adequate treatment as early in the
Accordingly, patients as well as their families if appropriate may course of a new episode as possible to decrease the likelihood
of a full-blown relapse or complication.
Table 5: Measures which can improve medication
compliance TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR MANAGEMENT
FOR DEPRESSION
• When and how often to take medicines
• Preferably give once a day dosing
• Prescribe minimum number of tablets Treatment options for management of depression can be
• Always ask the patient about kind of formulation (e.g. tablet, capsule etc) broadly be divided into antidepressants, electroconvulsive
which they would prefer to take
therapy (ECT) and psychosocial interventions. Other less
• Check the whole prescription to avoid duplication of medication
commonly used treatment or treatments used in patients
• Explain the patient that the beneficial effect will be seen only after
2‑4 weeks of intake of medications with treatment resistant depression include repetitive
• Explain the patient the need to take medication even after feeling better transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), light therapy,
• Explanation of side effects, If patients asks about the side effects‑ explain
transcranial direct stimulation, vagal nerve stimulation,
the patient about the same
deep brain stimulation and sleep deprivation treatment.
• Explain the patient as to what to do‑ if they encounter side effects
• Encourage the patient to report side effects In many cases benzodiazepines are used as adjunctive
• The need to consult with psychiatrist before discontinuing medications treatment, especially during the initial phase of treatment.
Table 6: Antidepressants Armamentarium
Antidepressant Usual dose range (mg/day) Common side effects
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI)
Fluoxetine 20‑80 Sexual dysfunction, GI distress, weight loss/gain,
Paroxetine 20‑60 anxiety, insomnia
Fluvoxamine 50‑300
Sertraline 50‑200
Citalopram 20‑40
Escitalopram 10‑20
Tricyclic tertiary amines (TCAs)
Amitriptyline 50‑200 Sexual dysfunction, anticholinergic effects, drowsiness,
Doxepin 75‑300 orthostasis, conduction abnormalities, mild GI distress,
Imipramine 75‑300 weight gain
Clomipramine 75‑300
Tricyclic Secondary Amines
Desipramine 100‑300
Nortriptyline 25‑150
Protriptyline 15‑20
Tetracyclic
Maprotiline 50‑75
Unicyclic
Bupropion 150‑450 Mild GI distress, high risk of seizure after 450 mg/day
Norepinephrine Serotonin reuptake
Inhibitors (NSRI)
Venlafaxine 75‑300 Mild anticholinergics effects, drowsiness, conduction
Duloxetine 20‑60 abnormalities, GI distress
Milnacipran 50‑200
Desvenlafaxine
Norepinephrine Serotonin Reuptake
Enhance (NSRE)
Tianeptine 25‑50 Nausea, constipation, abdominal pain, headache,
dizziness and changes in dreaming
Noradrenaline and Specific Serotonin
Antidepressants (NaSSA)
Mirtazapine 15‑45 Mild anticholinergic effects, drowsiness, orthostasis,
conduction abnormalities, GI distress, weight gain
Atypical antidepressants/Serotonin
Modulators
Trazadone 150‑300 Mild anticholinergic effects, drowsiness, orthostasis,
Nefazodone 100‑300 conduction abnormalities, GI distress, weight gain,
severe hepatotoxicity
Contd...
S38 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Table 6: Contd...
Antidepressant Usual dose range (mg/day) Common side effects
Reversible Selective Mono Amine Oxidase
Inhibitors (RIMA)
Moclobemide
Mono Amine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOI)
Phenelzine 45‑90 Orthostatic hypotension, drowsiness,
Isocarboxazid 30‑60 insomnia, headaches
Tranylcypromine 20‑60
Serotonin partial agonist reuptake
inhibitor (SPARI)
Vilazodone 20‑40 Diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, and insomnia
Table 7: Factors that determine the selection of response to pharmacotherapy as well as the emergence of
Antidepressant Drug side effects and safety. Factors to consider when determining
the frequency of monitoring include severity of illness,
Patient specific
• Patients preference patient’s co-operation with treatment, the availability of
• Previous history of response/tolerability to medication in the patient or social support and the presence of comorbid general medical
family member problems. Visits may be kept frequent enough to monitor
• Past side effects with medication
and address suicidality and to promote treatment adherence.
• Other medication being taken – drug interactions
Improvement with pharmacotherapy can be observed after
• Patient’s age – with increasing age the pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic changes become more important 4-6 weeks of treatment. If at least a moderate improvement is
• Comorbid medical illness (e.g., glaucoma, cardiac conditions) not observed in this time period, reappraisal and adjustment
• Comorbid psychiatric disorder/symptoms
of the pharmacotherapy should be considered.
• Gender issues – sexual dysfunction
• Intellectual and psychological capacities
Drug specific Psychotherapeutic interventions
• Side effects A specific, effective psychotherapy may be considered
• Cost as an initial treatment modality for patients with mild to
• Dosing strategy
moderate depressive disorder. Clinical features that may
• Type of formulation ‑ Tablet, Cap, Syrup
suggest the use of a specific psychotherapy include the
• Safety in overdose (Relative Toxicity) ‑ fatal overdose is significantly
• Lower with SSRIs than with tricyclic antidepressants presence of significant psychosocial stressors, intrapsychic
conflict and interpersonal difficulties. Patient’s preference
for psychotherapeutic approaches is an important
Additionally in some cases, lithium and thyroid supplements
factor that may be considered in the decision to use
may be used as an augmenting agent when patient is not
psychotherapy as the initial treatment modality. Pregnancy,
responding to antidepressants.
lactation, orthe wish to become pregnant may also be an
indication for psychotherapy as an initial treatment. Various
Antidepressants
psychotherapeutic interventions which may be considered
Large numbers of antidepressants (Table-6) are available for
based on feasibility, expertise available and affordability are
management of depression and in general all the antidepressants
have been shown to have nearly equal efficacy in the management shown in Table-8.
of depression. Antidepressant medication may be used as
initial treatment modality for patients with mild, moderate, Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and interpersonal
or severe depressive episode. The selection of antidepressant therapy are the psychotherapeutic approaches that have the
medications may be based on patient specific and drug specific best documented efficacy in the literature for management
factors, as given in Table-7. In general, because of the side of depression. When psychodynamic psychotherapy is used
effect and safety profile, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors as specific treatment, in addition to symptom relief it is
(SSRIs) are considered to be the first line antidepressants. Other frequently with broader long term goals.
preferred options include tricyclic antidepressants, mirtazapine,
bupropion, and venlafaxine. Usually the medication must be The psychiatrist should take into account multiple
started in the lower doses and the doses must be titrated, factors when determining the frequency of sessions for
depending on the response and the side effects experienced. individual patients, including the specific type and goals
of psychotherapy, the frequency necessary to create and
Dose and duration of antidepressants maintain a therapeutic relationship, the frequency of visits
Patients who have started taking an antidepressant required to ensure treatment adherence, and the frequency
medication should be carefully monitored to assess the necessary to monitor and address suicidality. The frequency
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S39
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
of outpatient visits during the acute phase generally varies ACUTE PHASE TREATMENT
from once a week in routine cases to as often as several
times a week. Regardless of the type of psychotherapy The goal of acute phase treatment is to achieve remission,
selected, the patient’s response to treatment should be as presence of residual symptoms increase the risk of
carefully monitored. For a given patient, time spent and chronic depression, poor quality of life and also impairs
frequency of visit may be decided by the psychiatrist. recovery from physical illness. Treatment generally results
in improvement in quality of life and better functional
Psychoeducation to the patient and, when appropriate, to capacity. The various components of acute phase treatment
the family are shown in Table-10 and the treatment algorithm is shown
Education concerning depression and its treatments can in figure-2 and 3.
be provided to all patients. When appropriate, education
can also be provided to involved family members. Specific In acute phase psychiatrist may choose between
educational elements may be helpful in some circumstances, several initial treatment modalities, including
e.g. that depression is a real illness and that effective pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, the combination of
treatments are both necessary and available may be crucial medication and psychotherapy, or ECT. Selection of an
for patients who attribute their illness to a moral defect initial treatment modality is usually influenced by both
or witch craft. Education regarding available treatment clinical (e.g. severity of symptoms) and other factors
options will help patients make informed decisions, (e.g. patient preference).
anticipate side effects and adhere to treatments. Another
important aspect of providing education is informing the Antidepressant medication may be used as initial treatment
patient and especially family about the lag period of onset modality for patients with mild, moderate, or severe major
of action of antidepressants. Important components of depressive disorder. Clinical features that may suggest that
psychoeducation are given in Table-9. medication are the preferred treatment modality includes
history of prior positive response to antidepressant
Combination of pharmacotherapy and Psychotherapy medication, severity of symptoms, significant sleep and
There is class of patients who may require the combination appetite disturbance, agitation, or anticipation of the need
of pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. In general, the for maintenance therapy. Patients with severe depression
same issues that influence the choice of medication or with psychotic features will require use of combination of
psychotherapy when used alone should be considered antidepressant and antipsychotic medication and/or ECT.
when choosing treatments for patients receiving combined
therapy. The initial selection of an antidepressant medication is
largely be based on the anticipated side effects, the safety
PHASES OF ILLNESS/TREATMENT or tolerability of these side effects for individual patients,
patient preference and comorbid physical illnesses.
Management of depression can be broadly divided into three
phases, i.e., acute phase, continuation phase and maintenance Dose and duration of antidepressants: Once an
phase. Maintenance phase of treatment is usually considered antidepressant medication has been selected, it can be
when patient has recurrent depressive disorder. started initially at lower doses and careful monitoring to
Table 8: Psychotherapeutic interventions for Depression
Type of therapy
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT) • Identifying problems, Identifying cognitive distortions/errors, generating alternative thoughts,
problem solving, mastery and pleasure rating, activity scheduling, anxiety management
strategies‑ relaxation exercises
Interpersonal Therapy (IPT) • Focuses on losses, role disputes and transitions, social isolation, deficits in social skills, and other
interpersonal factor that may impact on the development of depression
Supportive psychotherapy • Allowing the patient to ventilate, providing emotional support, guidance, increasing the patient’s
self‑esteem, accepting feelings at face value, enhancing hope, enhancing adaptive coping
Behavioral Therapy (BT) • Activity scheduling, social skills training and problem solving
Marital Therapy (MT) • Marital therapy conceptualizes depression as an interpersonal context such that both members of
the marital dyad are included in therapy. Treatment includes behavioral exchange, communication
training, problem solving, and resolution of conflict around issues such as financial, sex, affection,
parenting, and intimacy
Family Therapy • When interpersonal problems in the context of pathological family dynamics are responsible for
depression, than family therapy may be considered. It would involve all the family members and
include similar principles as for marital therapy
Brief Psychodynamic Psychotherapy (BPD) • The premise of brief psychodynamic psychotherapy is that depressive symptoms remit as patient
learns new methods to cope with inner conflicts. Several different approaches have been described
S40 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Mild to moderate Depression
Evaluate for the type and severity of depression
Evaluate for past history of depression
Evaluate for past history of treatment and response
Evaluate for family history of depression
Evaluate for physical and psychiatric comorbidity
Evaluate for concomitant drugs which patient is receiving
Evaluate for the presence of psychosocial stressors
Patient’s preference
No past history of depression
Mild to moderate depression Patient’s preference
Presence of psychosocial stressors Past and family history of
Past history of good response good response
Receiving other medications and high Low risk of drug interactions
risk of drug interactions Moderate depression
Psychotherapy Pharmacotherapy Remission
Remission
No response Partial response No response
Optimize the treatment Change antidepressant
Change to • Increase the frequency of psychotherapy or
antidepressant • Increase the dose of antidepressants to Switch to psychotherapy
maximum tolerable dose
Change/Combination
• If receiving psychotherapy – add antidepressants
• If receiving antidepressants – add psychotherapy or change the antidepressant
Augmentation/Combination
• If receiving antidepressants – add second antidepressants/
augmenting agent taking into consideration the issue of tolerability
and side effects
Figure -2: Treatment algorithm of mild to moderate Depression
Table 9: Basic components of Psychoeducation be done to assess the response to pharmacotherapy as
well as the emergence of side effects, clinical conditions,
• Assessing the knowledge of the patient and caregivers about aetiology,
treatment and prognosis and safety. Factors to consider when determining the
• Explain about the diagnosis and symptoms of depression frequency of monitoring include severity of illness, patient’s
• Explain that depression is a medical disorder which is treatable cooperation and presence with treatment, and availability
• Explain about the lag period of onset of action
of social support andpresence of comorbid general medical
• Provide information about aetiology
problems. Visits may be frequent enough to monitor and
• Provide information about treatment in terms of available options, their
efficacy/effectiveness, side effects, duration of use address suicidality and to promote treatment adherence.
• Discuss about importance of medication and treatment compliance Improvement with pharmacotherapy can be observed after
• Provide information about possible course and long term outcome 4-6 weeks of treatment. If at least a moderate improvement
• Discuss about problems of substance abuse, interpersonal conflict, stress etc
is not observed in this time period, reappraisal and
• Discuss about how to deal with day today stress
adjustment of the pharmacotherapy maybe considered.
• Discuss about communication patterns, problem solving etc
• Enhancing adaptive coping to deal with persistent/residual symptoms
• Discuss about relapse and how to identify the early signs of relapse In the initial phase, depending on the symptom severity and
• Encourage healthy life styles type of symptoms, such as presence of insomnia or anxiety,
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S41
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Severe Depression
Evaluate for past history of depression
Evaluate for past history of treatment and response
Evaluate for family history of depression
Evaluate for physical comorbidity
Evaluate for concomitant drugs which patient is receiving
Evaluate for the presence of psychosocial stressors
Evaluate the cognitive functions
Evaluate for suicidality, oral intake
Patient’s preference
Past history of good response Patient’s preference
Receiving other medications Past and family history of good response
and high risk of drug interactions Low risk of drug interactions
Suicidal
Poor oral intake
Catatonic symptoms
Pharmacotherapy
ECT+ Pharmacotherapy
(ECT for treatment of acute disturbance and
antidepressants for the continuation phase)
Partial response
No response
Optimize the treatment
• Increase the dose of antidepressants to
maximum tolerable dose
No further response
(cid:31) Switch to an antidepressant from same or different
pharmacological class or dual acting agent
(cid:31) Add ECT
(cid:31) Add second antidepressants/ augmenting agent
taking into consideration the issue of tolerability
and side effects
Figure 3: Treatment algorithm of Severe Depression
Table 10: Management in the acute phase patient shows 25-50% improvement during the initial 4
weeks of antidepressant trial, the dose must be optimized
• Comprehensive assessment (psychiatric/medical/psychosocial)
• Deciding on goals of treatment to the maximum tolerable dose. If there is less than 50%
Achieving remission improvement with 6-8 weeks of maximum tolerable dose
Ensure safety of patient and others and the medication compliance is good, a change in
• Choice of treatment setting
antidepressant may be considered.
• C hoosing a treatment modality: antidepressant medication, psychotherapy,
combined treatment with antidepressant and psychotherapy
• Use of adjunctive medications when indicated If after 4-8 weeks of treatment, if a moderate improvement is
• Use of ECT when indicated not observed, then a thorough review and reappraisal of the
• Psychoeducation diagnosis, complicating conditions and issues, and treatment
plan may be conducted. Reappraisal of the treatment
benzodiazepines or other hypnotics may be used for short regimen may also include evaluation of patient adherence and
duration. pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic factors. Following this
review, the treatment plan can be revised by implementing one
Failure to response: If at least some improvement (>25%) of several therapeutic options, including maximizing the initial
is not observed following 4 week of pharmacotherapy, a medication treatment, switching to another antidepressant
reappraisal of the treatment regimen be conducted and medication, augmenting antidepressant medications with
a change in antidepressant may be considered. When other agents/psychotherapy/ECT. Maximizing the initial
S42 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Continuation Phase treatment
Treated with Treated with Treated with combination Treated with combination
antidepressants psychotherapy of psychotherapy and of antidepressants and
during the acute during the acute antidepressants during the ECT/antipsychotics during
phase phase acute phase the acute phase
Continue antidepressants Continue psychotherapy at Continue with Continue with
at the same dose for 6- the same or decreased antidepressants at the antidepressants and
9month after achieving frequency for 6-9 months same dose and antipsychotic at the same
remission after achieving remission psychotherapy at the dose and for 6-9 months
same or decreased
after achieving
frequency for 6-9
remission
months after achieving
remission
Monitor for relapse of symptoms
No past H/O depression Past H/O depression
Discontinue treatment depression treatment Maintenance Treatment
Figure 4: Treatment algorithm for continuation phase treatment of depression
Maintenance Phase treatment
(H/O of ≥ 3 episodes)
• Treated with antidepressants during the acute • Treated with • Treated with
and continuation phase psychotherapy during antidepressants and
• Treated with combination of antidepressants the acute and psychotherapy during
and ECT/ antipsychotics during the acute continuation phase the acute and
and continuation phase continuation phase
• Continue with same treatment preferably for life long
• Monitor symptoms and treatment tolerability
Figure 5: Treatment algorithm for maintenance phase of depression
treatment regimen is perhaps the most conservative strategy. SSRI to another SSRI) or to one from a different pharmacologic
While using the higher therapeutic doses, patients are to be class (e.g., from an SSRI to a tricyclic antidepressant). Some
closely monitored for an increase in the severity of side effects expert suggests that while switching, a drug with a different
or emergence of newer side effects. or broader mechanism of action may be chosen.
Switching to a different antidepressant medication is a Augmentation of antidepressant medications may be helpful,
common strategy for treatment-refractory patients, especially particularly for patients who have had a partial response
those who have not shown at least partial response to the to initial antidepressant monotherapy. Options include
initial medication regimen. There is no consensus about adding a second antidepressant medication from a different
switching and patients can be switched to an antidepressant pharmacologic class, or adding another adjunctive medication
medication from the same pharmacologic class (e.g., from an such as lithium, psychostimulants, modafinil, thyroid hormone,
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S43
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
an anticonvulsant etc. Adding, changing, or increasing the of symptoms. The treatment algorithm to be followed is
intensity of psychotherapy may be considered for patients shown in figure-4. Patients who have been treated with
who do not respond to medication treatment. Following any antidepressants in the acute phase need to be maintained on
change in treatment, close monitoring need to be done. If at same dose of these agents for 16-24 weeks to prevent relapse
least a moderate level of improvement in depressive symptoms (total period of 6-9 month from initiation of treatment). There
is not seen after an additional 4–8 weeks of treatment, another are evidences to support the use of specific psychotherapy
thorough review need to be done. This reappraisal may include in continuation phase to prevent relapse. The use of other
verifying the patient’s diagnosis and adherence; identifying and somatic modalities (e.g. ECT) may be useful in patients where
addressing clinical factors that may be preventing improvement, pharmacology and/or psychotherapy have failed to maintain
such as the presence of comorbid general medical conditions stability in continuation phase. The frequency of visit during
or psychiatric conditions (e.g., alcohol or substance abuse); the continuation phase may be determined by patient’s clinical
and identifying and addressing psychosocial issues that may condition as well as the specific treatment being provided. If
be impeding recovery. If no new information is uncovered to maintenance phase treatment is not indicated for patients who
explain the patient’s lack of adequate response, depending on remain stable following the continuation phase, patients may
the severity of depression, ECT maybe considered. be considered for discontinuation of treatment. If treatment
is discontinued, careful monitoring be done for relapse, and
Choice of a specific psychotherapy: Out of the various treatment to be promptly reinstituted if relapse occurs.
psychotherapeutic interventions used for management
of depression, there is robust level of evidence for use of TREATMENT IN MAINTENENCE PHASE
CBT. The major determinants of type of psychotherapy
are patient preference and the availability of clinicians The goal of maintenance phase treatment is to prevent recurrence
with appropriate training and expertise in specific of depressive episodes. On an average, 50-85% of patients with
psychotherapeutic approaches. Other clinical factors which a single episode of major depression have at least one more
will influence the type of psychotherapy include the severity episodes. Therefore, maintenance phase treatment may be
of the depression. Psychotherapy is usually recommended considered to prevent recurrence. The duration of treatment
for patients with depression who are experiencing stressful may be decided keeping in view the previous treatment history
life events, interpersonal conflicts, family conflicts, poor and number of depressive episodes the person has had in the
social support and comorbid personality issues. past. Mostly the treatment that was effective for acute and
continuation phase need to be used in the maintenance phase
The optimal frequency of psychotherapy may be based on (Figure-5). Same doses of antidepressants, to which the patient
specific type and goals of the psychotherapy, the frequency had responded in previous phase is considered. The frequency
necessary to create and maintain a therapeutic relationship, of visit for CBT and IPTcan be reduced during the maintenance
the frequency of visits required to ensure treatment phase (once a month). There is no consensus regarding the
adherence, and the frequency necessary to monitor and duration and when to give and when not to give maintenance
address suicidality. Other factors which would also determine treatment. There is agreement to large extent that patients
the frequency of psychotherapy visits include the severity who have history of three or more relapses or recurrences need
of illness, the patient’s cooperation with treatment, the to be given long-term treatment.
availability of social supports, cost, geographic accessibility,
and presence of comorbid general medical problems. DISCONTINUATION OF TREATMENT
Besides the use of specific psychotherapy, all patients and their The decision to discontinue maintenance treatment may
caregivers may receive psychoeducation about the illness. be based on the same factors considered in the decision to
initiate maintenance treatment, including the probability
Role of Yoga and Meditation in management of of recurrence, the frequency and severity of past episodes,
depression: Studies related to role of traditional therapies the persistence of depressive symptoms after recovery, the
like meditation, Yoga and other techniques have been presence of comorbid disorders, and patient preferences.
mostly published in documents of various organizations When the decision is made to discontinue or terminate
propagating that particular technique. Well-designed psychotherapy in the maintenance phase, the manner in
scientific studies to authenticate these claims need to which this is done may be individualized to the patient’s
be conducted; however, efficacy of these techniques as needs. When the decision is made to discontinue maintenance
supportive/adjuctive therapy is widely accepted. pharmacotherapy, it is best to taper the medication over
the course of at least several weeks to few months. Such
TREATMENT IN CONTINUATION PHASE tapering may allow for the detection of emerging symptoms
or recurrences when patients are still partially treated and
The goal of continuation phase is to maintain the gains therefore can be easily returned to full therapeutic intensity.
achieved in the acute phase of treatment and prevent relapse In addition, such tapering can help minimize the risks of
S44 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Table 11: Management of depression Special situations
Special situation Strategies
Suicidal risk • Risk of suicide is high in patients with depression.
• Suicide risk to be assessed initially and over the course of treatment.
• If the patient has suicidal ideation, intention, and/or a plan, close surveillance is necessary.
• Whenever possible, information about presence of suicidal ideation in patient be shared with family members and
they need to be instructed for various safety measures to be taken.
• The risk of suicide in some patients recovering from depression increases transiently as they develop the energy
and capacity to act on self‑destructive plans made earlier in the course of their illness. However, it is not possible
to predict with certainly whether a given patient will kill himself or herself.
• A careful selection of antidepressants and ECT is an important decision to be taken by psychiatrist after
considering all related factors.
• Wherever feasible, the prescribed drugs need not be in the possession or reach of patient having suicidal intention.
Psychotic features • Depression with psychotic features carries a higher risk of suicide than does major depression uncomplicated by
psychosis
• It also constitutes a risk factor for recurrent depression.
• Depression with psychotic features responds better to treatment with a combination of antidepressants and
antipsychotics than to treatment with either component alone.
• ECT is also highly effective in depression with psychotic features.
Atypical features • Atypical depressive feature include severe anxiety, vegetative symptoms of reversed biological functions (i.e.,
increased rather than decreased sleep, appetite, and weight), marked mood reactivity, sensitivity to emotional
rejection, phobic symptoms, and a sense of severe fatigue that creates a sensation of “leaden paralysis” or extreme
heaviness of the arms or legs.
• Tricyclic antidepressants yield response rates of only 35%‑50%. Response rates with MAO inhibitors are in
the range of 55%‑75% in patients with atypical depression. If it is determined that the patient does not wish to,
cannot, or is unlikely to adhere to the dietary and drug precautions associated with MAO inhibitor treatment, the
use of an alternative antidepressant is indicated.
• The results of several studies suggest that SSRIs, MAOIs, and possibly bupropion maybe more effective
treatment for atypical depression.
Alcohol and/or substance • Because of the frequent comorbidity of depression and alcohol or other substance abuse, efforts need to be made
abuse or dependence to obtain a detailed history of the patient’s substance use.
• If the patient is found to have a substance use disorder, a program to ensure abstinence may be regarded as a
principle priority in the treatment.
• It is also advisable, if other factors permit, to detoxify such a patient before initiating antidepressant therapy.
• Benzodiazepines and other sedative hypnotics carry the potential for abuse or dependence and these may be used
cautiously except as part of a detoxification regimen.
• Hepatic dysfunction and hepatic enzyme induction frequently complicate pharmacotherapy of patients with
alcoholism and other substance abuse; these conditions require careful monitoring of blood levels.
Depression with features of • Clomipramine and the SSRIs have been demonstrated to be efficacious in the management of
obsessive-compulsive disorder obsessive‑compulsive symptoms in addition to their antidepressants efficacy.
Depression with panic and/or • Panic disorder complicates major depression in 15%‑30% of the cases.
other anxiety disorders • TCAs and SSRIs may initially worsen, rather than alleviating anxiety and panic symptoms; these medications
may therefore be introduced at a low dose and slowly increased when used to treat such patients.
• High potency benzodiazepine like alprazolam and clonazepam may sometimes be used with benefit either in
combination with antidepressants or as the sole pharmacological agent for anxiety, with or without panic, coupled
with milder forms of depression.
Depression with cognitive • Signs and symptoms of cognitive inefficiency routinely accompany major depression.
dysfunction (pseudo • Some patients have both depression and dementia, while others have depression that causes cognitive
dementia) impairment (i.e., pseudo‑dementia).
• Several clinical features help in differentiating pseudo‑dementia from true dementia. Pseudo‑demented patients
generally exert relatively less effort but report more incapacity than patients with true dementia. In more
advanced stage, patients with dementia typically fail to recognize their cognitive failure.
• It is important that patients with major depression with cognitive disturbance are not misdiagnosed and thereby
denied the antidepressant medication or ECT.
• Depression related cognitive dysfunction is a reversible condition that resolves with treatment of the underlying
depression.
Dementia • Individuals suffering from dementia need to be prescribed antidepressants which have least potential of
anticholinergic effect, e.g., bupropion, fluoxetine, sertraline, and, of the tricyclic agents, desipramine or
nortriptyline. Alternatively, some patients do well when given stimulants in small doses.
• Among SSRIs, paroxetine may be avoided.
• ECT is also effective in depression superimposed on dementia, and it may be used if medications are
contraindicated, not tolerated, or if immediate resolution of the major depressive disorder episode is medically
indicated (such as when it interferes with the patient’s acceptance of food).
Post Psychotic Depression • Adding an antidepressant agent to the patient’s antipsychotic regimen can help in managing post‑psychotic
depression effectively.
Contd...
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S45
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Table 11: Contd...
Special situation Strategies
Depression during pregnancy • Women in childbearing age may be counseled about the risk of becoming pregnant while taking psychotropic
or following Childbirth medications.
• Whenever possible, a pregnancy is to be planned in consultation with psychiatrist so that medication may be
discontinued before conception if feasible.
• The clinicians need to carefully weigh the risks and benefits of prescribing psychotropic agents to the pregnant
patient, taking into consideration the possibilities of physical (especially during the first trimester) and behavioral
teratogenesis.
• In patients whose safety and well‑being require antidepressants medications, antidepressants may be justifiably
used, after the first trimester, if possible.
• ECT may be used as an alternative treatment; the current literature supports the safety for mother and fetus, as
well as the effectiveness of ECT during pregnancy.
• Postpartum depression is to be treated according to the same principles delineated for other depressive condition.
• However, issue of breast feeding and appropriate precautions need to be explained to patient and caregivers.
Seasonal depression • Some individuals suffer annual episode of depression whose onset is in the fall or early winter, usually at the
same time each year.
• The depressive episodes frequently have atypical features such as hypersomnia and overeating.
• The entire range of treatments for depression may also be used to treat seasonal affective disorder, either in
combination with or as an alternative to light therapy.
Depression in elderly • Antidepressants are effective in treatment of depression in old age.
• The high rates of adverse effects associated with TCAs suggest that these agents must not be used as the first line
agents.
• The lower rate of adverse events in the newer antidepressants (SSRIs) makes them more acceptable. However,
nortriptyline has a role in severe depression in the elderly.
• ECT has demonstrated efficacy in treatment of old age depression with the benefit of rapid response in the
severely ill with and without psychotic symptoms.
Depression in Children • There are evidences that SSRIs are effective in child and adolescent depression and these are generally the first
choice of drug.
• The commonly used SSRIs include fluoxetine. Other newer antidepressants have not been adequately evaluated
in childhood and use of all these classes of drugs may be used with careful monitoring.
• Psychotherapeutic interventions like CBT and IPT have also been shown to be efficacious in children and
adolescents.
Post- Stroke Depression • Post Stroke Depression is a common problem seen in at least 30‑40% of survivors of intra‑cerebral hemorrhage.
• Antidepressant drugs may be beneficial in managing depressive symptoms and allow faster Post Stroke
rehabilitation.
• Treatment is complicated by medical co‑morbidity and by the potential for interaction with other co‑prescribed
drugs.
• Fluoxetine and nortriptyline are probably the most standard and seen to be effective.
Cardiac disease: • The presence of specific cardiac conditions complicates or contraindicates certain forms of antidepressant
medication therapy, notably use of TCAs.
• Cardiac history is to be carefully explored before the initiation of medication treatment. Although TCAs have
been used effectively to treat depression in patients with some forms of ischemic heart disease, particular care
need to be taken in using TCAs in patients with a history of ventricular arrhythmia, subclinical sinus node
dysfunction, conduction defects (including asymptomatic conduction defects), prolonged QT intervals, or a recent
history of myocardial infarction.
• SSRIs, bupropion, and ECT appear to be safer for patients with preexisting cardiac disease, although the latter
may require consultation with a specialist and treatment modification before use. However, there are also reports
which suggest that SSRIs can also lead to arrhythmia.
• MAOIs do not adversely affect cardiac conduction, rhythm, or contraction but may induce orthostatic
hypotension and also run the risk of interacting adversely with other medications that may be taken by such
patients. There is anecdotal evidence that trazodone may induce ventricular arrhythmias, but this agent may be
avoided in elderly because of orthostatic blood pressure decrements.
• Consultation with the patient’s cardiologist before and during antidepressant medication treatment may be advisable
and is especially advisable during any treatment for a patient who has recently had a myocardial infarction.
Hypertension • Antihypertensive agents and TCAs may interact to either intensify or counteract the effect of the antihypertensive therapy.
• The action of antihypertensive agents that block alpha receptors (e.g., prazosin) may be intensified by
antidepressant medications that block these same receptors, notably the TCAs and trazodone. TCAs may
antagonize the therapeutic actions of guanethidine, clonidine, or α‑methyldopa.
• Antihypertensive, like diuretics which mainly act on kidney, may precipitate SIADH, when given along with
SSRIs.
• Concurrent antihypertensive treatment, especially with diuretics, increases the likelihood that TCAs, trazodone,
or MAOIs will induce symptomatic orthostatic hypotension.
• β Blockers, especially propranolol, may be a cause of depressive disorder in some patients.
• Dose‑dependent elevations in blood pressure with venlafaxine are usually mild, although more severe elevations
have been observed, making this agent less preferable in patients with hypertension.
Contd...
S46 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Table 11: Contd...
Special situation Strategies
Diabetes mellitus • SSRIs may reduce serum glucose by up to 30% and cause appetite suppression, resulting in weight loss.
• Fluoxetine may be avoided, owing to its increased potential for hypoglycaemia, particularly in patients with
non‑insulin dependent diabetes. If fluoxetine is prescribed, the patient should be advised of the need to monitor
serum glucose levels regularly.
• TCAs are more likely to impair diabetic control as they increase serum glucose levels by up to 150%,
increase appetite (particularly carbohydrate craving) and reduce the metabolic rate. They are generally
considered safe unless the diabetes is very poorly controlled or is associated with significant cardiac or
renal disease.
• Antidepressants such as amitriptyline, imipramine, duloxetine and citalopram are also used to treat painful diabetic
neuropathy.
Asthma • Antidepressant medications except MAOI may be used for patients with asthma without fear of interaction. Other
antidepressant like SSRIs, TCAs, etc., may be used for patient with asthma without any apprehension about drug
interaction.
Glaucoma • Antidepressants that cause or exacerbate acute close angle glaucoma include medications with anticholinergics,
serotonergic or adrenergic properties.
• TCAs have the greatest anticholinergic properties,
• SSRIs and SNRIs by virtue of their action on serotonin receptor can also cause mydriasis and thereby can produce
papillary block.
• Antidepressants lacking anticholinergic and serotonergic activity (bupropion) may be preferred.
• Benzodiazepines (Diazepam) have mild anticholinergics properties.
Obstructive uropathy • Prostatism and other forms of bladder outlet obstruction are relative contraindications to the use of antidepressant
medication compounds with antimuscarinic effects.
• Benzodiazepines, trazodone, and MAOIs may also retard bladder emptying.
• The antidepressant medications with the least propensity to do this are SSRIs, bupropion, and desipramine.
Parkinson’s disease • Bupropion, exerts a beneficial effect on the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease in some patients but may also induce
psychotic symptoms, perhaps because of its agonistic action in the dopaminergic system.
• MAOIs (other than selegiline, also known as L‑deprenyl, a selective type B MAOI is recommended in the treatment
of Parkinson’s disease) may adversely interact with L‑dopa products.
• Selegiline loses its specificity for MAO‑B in doses greater than 10 mg/day and may induce serotonin syndrome
when given in higher doses in conjunction with serotonin‑enhancing antidepressant medications.
• There is no evidence favoring any particular antidepressant medication from the standpoint of therapeutic efficacy
in patients with Parkinson’s disease complicated by depressive disorder.
• The theoretical benefits of the antimuscarinic effects of some of the TCAs in the treatment of patients with depressive
disorder with Parkinson’s disease are offset by the memory impairment that may result.
• ECT exerts a transient beneficial effect on the symptoms of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease in many patients.
• Amoxapine, an antidepressant medication with dopamine‑receptor blocking properties, may be avoided for patients
who have Parkinson’s disease.
• Lithium may in some instances induce or exacerbate parkinsonian symptoms.
Malignancy • In treatment of depression in subjects with malignancy, SSRI are considered to be the first line drugs. The advantage
of SSRI is that they can act as effective adjunct analgesic drugs, especially in neuropathic pain. Disadvantages
of SSRI are drug‑drug interaction with drugs that are metabolized by CYP450/3A4 (e.g. cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin). Fluoxetine, may be used with caution especially is patients with hepatic insufficiency, since it has
a long half‑life.
• TCAs are also good adjunct analgesics. But the disadvantages with TCAs are anticholinergic side effects and
orthostatic hypotension. They can also worsen their side effects of drugs like opioids (e.g. constipation and dry
mouth) which are often needed for pain control.
• Psychostimulants, with their rapid onset of action have some advantages for depressed cancer patients in the sense
of promoting a sense of well‑being, decreasing fatigue, stimulating appetite, potentiating the analgesic effect of
opioids and decreasing opioid induced sedation.
• The goal of psychological treatment in depressed patients with cancer is to reduce emotional distress, improve
morale, coping ability, self‑esteem and sense of control.
Drug induced depression • If medication induced depression is suspected, the suspected drug should be discontinued if possible and replaced
with another agent less likely to induce depression.
• When this is not possible or when discontinuation does not result in remission of the depressive symptoms,
pharmacotherapy for the depression may be considered.
Contd...
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S47
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
Table 11: Contd...
Special situation Strategies
Liver disease • Liver impairment affects basic elements of medication pharmacokinetics, from absorption to metabolism,
distribution to elimination, changing drug levels, duration of action, and efficacy.
• Most antidepressants are highly protein‑bound‑ except, venlafaxine, and methylphenidate.
• In liver failure, a reduction in albumin and alpha1‑acid‑glycoprotein production, along with altered protein‑binding,
leads to higher levels of free pharmacologically‑active drug. This is offset by a compensatory increase in the rate of
hepatic metabolism, and this is especially important for drugs with low intrinsic clearance.
• Most antidepressants are highly lipid‑soluble and require hepatic metabolism (biotransformation into more polar
compounds) to allow them to be cleared from the body in urine or bile.
• Antidepressants can also be divided into two major categories of clearance, determined by their enzyme affinity.
Flow‑limited drugs have high hepatic extraction, and their hepatic clearance is dependent on the rate of delivery of
the drug to the liver. TCAs undergo significant first pass metabolism of greater than 50% after oral administration.
• Drugs with low hepatic‑enzyme affinity (e.g., paroxetine) are metabolized more slowly, as enzyme saturation is the
rate limiting step. The severity of impairment rather than the underlying aetiology is the most important factor to
consider in prescribing for this group. Renal function may also be affected.
• As the risk of drug toxicity increases with disease severity, lower starting and total doses of medication are
recommended (starting dose ‑about one forth that of adults).
Renal disease • In this group of patients, TCAs are probably safer than SSRIs.
• The degree of renal impairment rather than the cause is most important.
• Renal impairment may be present without a raised creatinine level. TCAs metabolites are excreted by the kidneys,
hence accumulation may occur. Of the SSRIs, sertraline is not recommended by its manufacturers in renal failure.
• Fluoxetine, citalopram and paroxetine may be started at very low dose in patients with a glomerular filtration rate
of at least>10 ml/min.
• Lithium may only be prescribed if absolutely necessary, at low doses, on alternate days, with frequent checking of
serum levels.
Perioperative period • TCAs may preferably be stopped prior to surgery. SSRIs and MAOI can interact with pethidine, pentazocine, and
dextromethorphan, at the pharmacodynamics levels and lead to serotonin syndrome, therefore such drugs may be
avoided during the perioperative period. However, SSRIs may not be discontinued in order to prevent anesthetic
interactions, except when the SSRI is used in combination with aspirin or an Non‑steroidal anti‑inflammatory
drugs and when the SSRI is used in patients over 80 years of age. In these patients, the balance of risks of
withdrawal and bleeding is to be discussed with patients. Because abrupt discontinuation can cause serious
withdrawal symptoms, the drugs may be gradually discontinued over few days to 2 weeks before surgery.
• Lithium can contribute to hemodynamic instabilities, interfere with sodium and potassium metabolism, and the
renal excretion of lithium can be reduced in presence of renal complications. The physical risk of intoxication,
with its detrimental and fatal risks for the central nervous system, is unacceptable. Therefore, lithium
discontinuation is recommended. Lithium can be stopped at once because no withdrawal symptoms occur.
• When, postoperatively, the patient is hemodynamically stable, is able and allowed to drink, and is not on new,
potentially interfering drugs, the medication may be restarted gradually.
antidepressant medication discontinuation syndromes. signs of depression, and a plan for seeking treatment in
Discontinuation syndromes have been found to be more the event of recurrence of symptoms may be formulated.
frequent after discontinuation of medications with shorter Patients may be monitored for next few months to identify
half-lives, and patients maintained on short-acting agents relapse. If a patient suffers a relapse upon discontinuation
may be given even longer, more gradual tapering. Paroxetine, of medication, treatments need to be promptly reinitiated.
venlafaxine, TCAs, and MAOIs tend to have higher rates of In general, the previous treatment regimen to which the
discontinuation symptoms while bupropion-SR, citalopram, patient responded in the acute and continuation phase are
fluoxetine, mirtazapine, and sertraline have lower rates. The to be considered.
symptoms of antidepressants discontinuation include
flu-like symptoms, insomnia, nausea, imbalance, sensory MANAGEMENT OF TREATMENT RESISTANCE
disturbances (e.g., electrical sensations) and hyperarousal DEPRESSION
(agitation). If the discontinuation syndrome is mild,
reassurance may be sufficient. If mild to moderate, short- Initial treatment with antidepressant medication fails to
term symptomatic treatment (analgesics, antiemetics, or achieve a satisfactory response in approximately 20%-30%
anxiolytics) may be beneficial. If it is severe, antidepressant of patients with depressive disorder. In some cases the
are to be reinstated and tapered off more slowly. apparent lack of treatment response is actually a result
of faulty diagnosis, inadequate treatment, or failure to
After the discontinuation of active treatment, patients appreciate and remedy coexisting general medical and
should be reminded of the potential for a depressive psychiatric disorders or other complicating psychosocial
relapse. Patient may be again informed about the early factors. Adequate treatment for at least 4-6 weeks is
S48 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
necessary before concluding that a patient is not responsive who has not responded to medication is carrying out
to a particular medication. First step in care of a patient a thorough review and reappraisal of the psychosocial
and biological information base, aimed at revarifying the
Depression diagnosis and identifying any neglected and possibly
No Response to treatment contributing factors, including the general medical
problems, alcohol or substance abuse or dependence,
other psychiatric disorders, and general psychosocial issues
impeding recovery. Algorithm for arriving at the diagnosis
of treatment resistant depression is given in figure-6.
Correct the diagnosis and
Reassess diagnosis
treat accordingly
Some clinicians require two successive trials of medications
of different categories for adequate duration before
Has the patient received considering treatment resistant depression (TRD).
adequate doses for
Management of TRD involves addition of an adjunctive
sufficient duration?
agent, combining two antidepressants, addition of ECT
or other somatic treatments like rTMS.Algorithm for
management of TRD is given in figure-7.
Is adherence to medication
proper?
Are Side effects interfering Addition of an adjunct to an antidepressant: Lithium
with treatment? is the drug primarily used as an adjunct; other agents
in use are thyroid hormone and stimulants. Opinion
differs as to the relative benefits of lithium and thyroid
Look for emerging organic
causes, rule out any other Treatment Resistant supplementation. It is reported that lithium is useful in over
comorbidities/stressors Depression 50% of antidepressant nonresponders and is usually well
Figure 6: Algorithm for arriving at the diagnosis of Treatment tolerated. The interval before full response to adjunctive
Resistant Depression lithium is said to be in the range of several daysto 3 weeks.
Treatment Resistant
Depression
Partial or no response
Augmentation with Combination ECT/ Other e.g. Lamotrigine,
Lithium/Thyroid / Antidepressants rTMS fluvoxamine,
Buspirone (TCA + SSRI) or Mirtazapine+ Bupropion,
(Bupropion + SSRI) Olanzapine etc. (Provide
Rationale)
Continuation Phase
Maintenance Phase
Figure 7: Algorithm for management of Treatment Resistant Depression
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S49
Gautam, et al.: CPGs for depression
If effective and well tolerated, lithium may be continued stimulation duration and intensity, can produce the most
for the duration of treatment of the acute episode. Thyroid benefits. Moreover, there is no consensus of the exact brain
hormone supplementation, even in euthyroid patients, localization for individual coil placement.
may also increase the effectiveness of antidepressant
treatment. The dose proposed for this purpose is 25 μg/ MANAGEMENT OF SPECIAL CONDITIONS
day of triidothyronine increased to 50 μg/day in a week.
Clinicians often encounter certain clinical situations which either
Simultaneous use of multiple antidepressants: Depression is require special attention or can influence treatment decisions.
a chronic disabling condition in case patient does not respond Management of these situations is summarized in table-11.
to single drug regimen; clinicians may use combination/
polytherapy with close monitoring of side effects and drug REFERENCES
interaction profile. Combinations of antidepressant carry
a risk of adverse interaction and sometimes require dose 1. American Psychiatry Association. Practice Guideline for the Treatment of
Patients With Major Depressive Disorder, Third Edition, 2010; pp ‑152.
adjustments. Use of a SSRI in combination with TCA has 2. Avasthi A, Grover S, Agarwal M. Research on antidepressants in India.
been reported to induce a particularly rapid antidepressant Indian J Psychiatry, 2010; 52 (Suppl): S341‑354.
3. Avasthi A, Grover S, Bharadwaj R. Clinical Practice guidelines for
response. However, fluoxetine added to TCAs causes an
treatment of depression in old age. (Eds): Shiv Gautam & Ajit Avasthi.
increased blood level and delayed elimination of the TCA, Published by Indian Psychiatric Society, 2007; Volume III, 51‑150.
4. Ellis P; Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists Clinical
predisposing the patient to TCA drug toxicity unless the dose
Practice Guidelines Team for Depression. Australian and New Zealand
of the TCA is reduced. Another strategy involves combined clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of depression. Aust N Z J
use of a tricyclic antidepressant and a MAO inhibitor, a Psychiatry. 2004 Jun;38(6):389‑407.
5. Gautam S, Batra L. Clinical Practice guidelines for management of
combination that is sometimes effective in alleviating severe depression. (Eds): Shiv Gautam & Ajit Avasthi. Published by Indian
medication-resistant depression, but the risk of serotonin Psychiatric Society, 2005; Volume I, 83‑119.
6. Grover S, Dutt A, Avasthi A. Research on Depression in India. Indian J
syndrome necessitates careful monitoring. Psychiatry, 2010; 52 (Suppl): S178‑S188.
7. Kennedy SH, Lam RW, McIntyre RS, Tourjman SV, Bhat V, Blier P,
Hasnain M, Jollant F, Levitt AJ, MacQueen GM, McInerney SJ, McIntosh
Electroconvulsive therapy: Response to ECT is generally
D, Milev RV, Müller DJ, Parikh SV, Pearson NL, Ravindran AV, Uher R;
good and the response rates are like any form of CANMAT Depression Work Group. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety
Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 Clinical Guidelines for the Management
antidepressant treatment and it may be considered in
of Adults with Major Depressive Disorder: Section 3. Pharmacological
virtually all cases of moderate or severe major depression Treatments. Can J Psychiatry. 2016 Aug 2. pii: 0706743716659417. [Epub
who do not respond to pharmacologic intervention. ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 27486148.
8. Kessler RC, Bromet EJ. The epidemiology of depression across cultures.
Approximately 50% of medication resistant patients exhibit Annu Rev Public Health. 2013;34:119‑38.
a satisfactory response to ECT. Lithium may be discontinued 9. Lam RW, Kennedy SH, Grigoriadis S, McIntyre RS, Milev R, Ramasubbu R,
Parikh SV, Patten SB, Ravindran AV; Canadian Network for Mood and
before initiation of ECT, as it has been reported to prolong
Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT). Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety
postictal delirium and delay recovery from neuromuscular Treatments (CANMAT) clinical guidelines for the management of major
depressive disorder in adults. III. Pharmacotherapy. J Affect Disord. 2009
blockade.
Oct;117 Suppl 1:S26‑43.
10. National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. Depression in adults:
Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) Recognition and Management. Clinical guideline (cg 90), 2009, pp 5‑64.
11. Parikh SV, Segal ZV, Grigoriadis S, Ravindran AV, Kennedy SH, Lam RW,
Patten SB; Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT).
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS; a type of Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) clinical
guidelines for the management of major depressive disorder in adults. II.
TMS that occurs in a rhythmic and repetitive form) has been
Psychotherapy alone or in combination with antidepressant medication. J
put forward as a new technique to treat this debilitating Affect Disord. 2009 Oct;117 Suppl 1:S15‑25.
12. Royal Australian And New Zealand College Of Psychiatrists Clinical
illness. Current evidence suggests that rTMS applied to the
Practice Guidelines Team For Depression. Australian and New Zealand
left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) is a promising clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of depression. Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry Vol. 38, Issue 6, 2004.
treatment strategy for depression, but not all patients show
13. Sarkar S, Grover S. A systematic review and meta‑analysis of trials of
a positive outcome. Current clinical outcome studies report antidepressants in India for treatment of depression. Indian J Psychiatry
rather modest superiority compared with placebo (sham). 2014; 56: 29‑38.
14. Singh T, Rajput M. Misdiagnosis of Bipolar Disorder. Psychiatry
To date, it remains unclear which TMS parameters, such as (Edgmont).2006; 3: 57–63.
S50 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017