Downloadedfromhttp://journals.lww.com/indianjpsychiatrybyBhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE=on05/12/2022
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Generalised Anxiety
Disorder (GAD) and Panic Disorder (PD)
Shiv Gautam, Akhilesh Jain, Manaswi Gautam, Vihang N. Vahia, Anita Gautam
Panic Disorder- Episodes of intense fear or discomfort
2202/21/50no=Ek515H6aY+2K8aDDpVAO/4CV3fC4lFSvT7iyRdO0D3i3DHrQlI/pQYnWA1XCwyCh0iMX4oHIsbgZEhLJk+a4NfQt1muoEz1vaKHPe5fMDhBybyrtaihcyspjnaidni/moc.wwl.slanruoj//:ptthmorfdedaolnwoD Participants of expert group on CPG for Generalised
accompanied by severe autonomic activity, palpitations,
Anxiety Disorder (GAD) and Panic Disorder
sweating, dyspnoea, chocking sensation or other somatic
symptoms like chest pain, trembling, nausea, discomfort
S.C Tiwari, Nilesh Shah, I.D. Gupta, B.N. Gangadhar,
or fluttering sensation in abdomen and impending fear of
Devendra Vijay Vergiya, Pratap Sharan
death. Patient perceives it as a serious medical condition
and invariably reaches to a medical emergency setup where
INTRODUCTION
after thorough physical evaluation he is declared normal.
Short description of anxiety disorders
Phobias- Many patients with GAD suffer from irrational,
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)
unrealistic fears and acute autonomic reactions to certain
Definition: One of the anxiety disorders, where the primary
specific situations or extreme fear to certan inanimate objects.
symptoms of anxiety are present at most days for at least
They include agarophobia (fear of open spaces) fear of crowds,
several weeks at a time, and usually for several months. The
being out side home alone or traveling in a bus train or car.
symptoms should usually involve elements of:
Some may have fear in closed spaces (claustrophobia) fear of
(a) Apprehension (worries about future misfortunes,
heights (acrophobia) fear of opposite sex (hetero-phobia) fear
feeling “ on edge”, etc)
of sight of blood (erythrophobia) or fear of facing certain social
(b) Motor tension (restlessness, inability to relax, trembling)
situations (social anxiety disorder) the common feature among
(c) Autonomic over activity (light-headedness, sweating,
all phobias being intense fear, increased autonomic activity and
tachycardia, tachypnea, dry mouth etc)
avoidance behavior (avoiding the fearful object or situation).
The transient appearance of depressive symptoms, does
Obsessive compulsive disorder- (OCD) has been seperately
not rule out the diagnosis of GAD as main diagnosis. The
dealt with in details in these guidelines however the
sufferer must not meet the full criteria for depressive
patients suffering from OCD have recurrent repetitive
episode, phobic disorder, panic disorder or OCD.
unwanted intrinsic thoughts (obsessions) or actions
(compulsions) or both which lead to extreme distress, loss
Patients with generalised anxiety disorder have high anxiety
of time and impairment of functioning of the individual. The
and are worried about intrapsychic conflicts or external
obsessious include douts, ideas of contamination, sexual
environmental events. They have multiple somatic symptoms
thoughts or religious preoccupations or negative thoughts
of anxiety, restlessness, difficulty in concentration, irritability,
towards gods/goddess, the compulsions include activities
fatigue, muscular tensions and difficulty in sleeping
like counting, checking, repeating, washing hoarding
particularly early insomnia. They have vague apprehension
and touching objects, some have to and fro movements
about future events and fear of unknown. Common features
of body parts. Patient is aware of the irrationality of
observed in anxiety disorders include:
thoughts/actions but cannot control them, which produces
Address for correspondence: intense anxiety and autonomic arousal with feelings of
Dr. Shiv Gautam, Director Professor, Gautam Institute of helplessness and guilt.
Behavioral Sciences and Alternative Medicine, Jaipur.
E-mail: dr_shivgautam@yahoo.com
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 License, which allows
Access this article online others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non-commercially, as long as the
Quick Response Code author is credited and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
Website: For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com
www.indianjpsychiatry.org
How to cite this article: Gautam S, Jain A, Gautam M,
Vahia VN, Gautam A. Clinical Practice Guidelines for the
DOI:
Management of Generalised Anxiety Disorder (GAD) and
10.4103/0019-5545.196975
Panic Disorder (PD). Indian J Psychiatry 2017;59:67-73.
© 2017 Indian Journal of Psychiatry | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow S67
Gautam, et al.: CPG for GAD & Panic Disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) - Usually it occurs after COMMON INGREDIENTS OF MANAGEMENT
a terrifying event that involving physical or psychological PLAN (FLOW CHART-1 AND 2)
traumatic event. It may also occure because of witnessing
or experiencing a serious harm to other significant persons The aim of management is to provide relief in psychological
in life. Patients have terrifying recollections of the event, or and somatic symptoms and minimize the impairment. This
nightmares. Some patients have an experience of living the can be addressed in following ways.
event in an illusionary or imaginary situation with hallucinations,
or flashback episodes. The patients suffer from intense 1. Pharmacotherapy
psychological or physical distress. Many patients develop loss The drug treatment of GAD is some times required as long
of interest, estrangement from others, sleep disturbances, as 6-12 month treatment, some evidence indicate that
irritability, diffi culty concentrating, hypervigilance, and treatment should be long term.
exaggerated startle response. This phenomenon may persist
for one month or more before it is diagnosed. 2. Psychotherapy
i. Cognitive behaviour therapy
Natural history and course ii. Behavioural techniques
The age of onset is difficult to specify, as most of the patients iii. Supportive Psychotherapy
have been anxious for long but report late. Nearly 1/3rd of iv. Insight oriented Psychotherapy
the patients who have GAD seek psychiatric treatment.
Many go to GPs, physicians, cardiologist, chest specialist Goals
for the somatic component of the disorder. Because of the • Psycho-education Direct explanation of the symptoms
high incidence of co-morbid mental disorders, the course and disorder to the patient and the family.
and prognosis is difficult to predict.The occurrence of • Monitoring of anxiety
several negative life events greatly increases the likelihood • Cognitive restructuring: Corrects the hypothesized
that the disorder will develop. In all, a chronic condition cognitive distortions and helps to identify and counter
may be life long. fear of bodily sensations.
Patient Presenting with Anxiety
GAD
Diagnosis by ICD 10 Criteria
Psychopharmacology Psychosocial Intervention Psychopharmacology
combined with Psychotherapy
Benzodiazepines
Clonazepam Cognitive – behaviour therapy Long-term outcome is better when
Chlordiazepoxida Relaxation therapy they are used in combination.
Diazepam Yoga & Meditation
Alprazolam Supportive Psychotherapy
Iniate from minimum adequate Insight therapy
Dose/ prescribed for a limited Family therapy
Period (6-8 weeks) Psycho education
Use with caution for dependence
Paroxetine; Sertraline; Fluoxetine Appendix– Flowchart - 1
SSRIs
Venlafaxine GAD
SNRI
Mirtazapine
NaSSA
Other Buspirone
TCA Tricyclic & Tetra cyclic
Beta Blockers Propranolol
Flowchart 1: Management of Generalized Anxiety Disorder
S68 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPG for GAD & Panic Disorder
PANIC DISORDER
Diagnosed by ICD 10
Acute Attack Long Term Care
Psychopharmacological Psychotherapy Psychopharmacological Psychotherapy
Treatment Treatment
i. SSRI- i. CBT i. BZDs CBT
Fluoxetine ii. Psychodynamic ii. SSRIs Psychodynamic
Paroxitine Psychotherapy iii. TCAs Psychotherapy
Sertraline iii. Group therapy iv. Venlafaxine Group therapy
Fluvoxamine v. NaSSA
Citalopram vi. Beta Blockers
ii. BZDS (Propanlol)
Alprazolam Ravi Kiran Mathur
Clonazepam
Diazepam
iii. SNRI
Venlafaxine
iv. NaSSA
v. Beta Blockers : Propanlol
Useful when combined
With BZDs
vi. TCAs
Imipramine
Clomipramine
Flowchart 2: Management of Panic Disorder
Efficacy It includes history of present illness, current symptoms;
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy has proven efficy other past psychiatric history, general medical history and history
psychotherapies do help in ameliorating symptoms of of substance use, personal history (eg. psychological
anxiety. It addresses cognitive distortions and somatic development, life events and response to those events),
symptoms. More effective with chronically anxious social, occupational and family history; review of the
patients, may need 8-10 sessions. It has been shown that patient’s medications; physical and mental status
yogic techniques produced greater motivation to practice examination and adequate diagnostic tool and criteria.
than progressive relaxation Meditation was found to be as Diagnose GAD according to ICD-10 (W.H.0,1992).
effective as pharmacotherapy in controlling symptoms of
anxiety. The overall efficacy claims are backed by very few Anxiety should not be due to the other Axis I disorder
Indian studies, but are useful. It requires considerable time (eg. mood disorder, psychotic disorder, social phobia, OCD,
and discipline from the patients. somatization disorder, hypochondriasis, PTSD) or a general
medical condition (eg. hyperthyroidism) or substance use
Adverse effects disorder (intoxication or withdrawal), (see appendix-1 for
These are relatively benign. Some patients may develop flow chart).
dependence on the therapist and that needs cautious
vigil. 2. Evaluating particular symptoms
Patients experience excessive anxiety but many of them
3. Combined pharmacological and psychotherapeutic experience panic attacks, which may worsen the clinical
intervention picture. The prolonged illness may cause depressive symptoms
Long-term outcome is better when they are used in with emergence of suicidality and substance abuse.
combination.
3. Evaluating severity of functional impairment
ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION Many may continue to function in their social and
occupational lives with some impairment, others may
1. Performing a diagnostic evaluation become severely incapacitated and give up their jobs and
Psychiatric evaluation and physical examination is social duties. The impairment in different areas can be
necessary. assessed self-administered visual analog scale.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S69
Gautam, et al.: CPG for GAD & Panic Disorder
FORMULATING TREATMENTS AND CHOICE OF treatment should be started with half the recommended
TREATMENT SETTINGS dose or less in order to minimize initial adverse drug events.
The antidepressant dose should be increased to the highest
The aim of management is to provide relief in psychological recommended therapeutic level if the initial treatment with
and somatic symptoms and minimize the impairment. This a low or medium dose fails.
can be addressed in following way.
For patients who do not improve with standard treatments,
1. Establishing and maintaining atherapeutic alliance a number of alternative options should be tried including
The treatment of GAD may be long lasting hence the augmentation with small dose of antipsychotics or adding
alliance is crucial. Understanding the life events, the extent another anxiolytic agent or addition of non-pharmacological
and severity of symptoms requires confiding and lasting therapy like cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) or Yoga,
therapeutic relationship. Meditation and increased physical activity as described
below.
Attention to the patient’s worries and fears are essential for
long term gains 4. Non-pharmacological treatment
Non pharmacological treatment found useful in treatment
2. Monitoringthe patient’s psychiatric status of anxiety disorders include supportive therapy, Exposure
The symptomatic improvement in psychological and therapy (e.g. gradual exposure in vivo, “flooding”) and response
autonomic symptoms leads to greater confidence in the prevention. Psychoeducational advice, and suggesions to not
treating doctor. The anxiety goes slowly with treatment to avoid feared situations are helpful in management.
and bursts of severe symptoms during the treatment need
constant monitoring. Cognitive Behavioural Therapy: Adequate strength of
evidence is available for Individual CBT, Group CBT and Self-
3. Pharmacotherapy directed CBT. Choosing between medications and CBT is
The drug treatment of GAD is some times is seen as determined by a number of factors, particularly the patient’s
a 6-12 month treatment, some evidence indicate that preference, treatment options at hand, adverse drug
treatment should be long term. effects, onset of efficacy, comorbidity (e.g. with depression),
financial considerations, time availability, accessibility of
a). Goals psychiatric and psychological treatment resources, and
Reduce psychological and autonomic symptoms and other experience of the clinician.
co morbid conditions. Improve occupational and social
functioning. Steps of CBT shall include:
1. Psychoeducation
b). Efficacy 2. Self-monitoring
Little Indian data to address the issue; mainly western data 3. Systemic exposure to panic inducing cues
available. 4. Countering anxious beliefs
5. Exposure to fear cues
c). Adverse effects 6. Modify [mal-adaptive behaviors
Different for different class of drugs. 7. Relapse prevention
8. Dealing with transference issues
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin- 9. Resolving interpersonal and other emotional issues.
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), and pregabalin
are recommended as first line drugs due to their favorable Initial expectations and anticipation favoring CBT
risk-benefit ratio, with some differentiation regarding • Accept that the worrying is out of control
the various anxiety disorders. The common category of • Perhaps, worrying offers some protective value.
pharmacological agents used in management of generialised • CBT will facilitate future adversities, despite the worrying.
anxiety disorders include SSRIs,SNRIs, Pregabalin, TCAs,
Benzodiazepines, Antihistamines, Atypical antipsychotics, During the course of the treatment, revised
and Antioxidants. Role of vitamin A, C and E has been understanding:
evaluated and recommended in adequate doses for patients • The reasons for worrying and fears cannot be controlled
suffering from GAD. • Subjectively learn to control response to the fears and
worries
Dosing • Learn to obviate the behaviour of worrying
Majority of patients respond to the low dose of • Worrying does not have a protective value
antidepressants (with the exception of OCD). In the elderly, • Actually, worrying reinforces negative thinking
S70 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPG for GAD & Panic Disorder
Excesive worrying increases likely hood or more 6. Addressing early signs of relapse
anxieties in the future The education that the illness is a chronic relapsing
CBT does not alter the method of managing source of illness is essential and emergence of anxiety with or
the worries without treatment should be promptly treated. Sudden
CBT helps to be better equipped to handle the future discontinuation may lead to emergence of withdrawal
stress. symptoms thus early recognition by the patient and the
family helps in prompt treatment.
Indian modules of psychotherapy
Several therapists have talked about Search of Indian MANAGEMENT AS PER THE DIFFERENT STAGES
module of psychotherapy and it is a felt need to have such a OF THE ILLNESS
module, which is socially and culturally relevant.
The treatment recommendations for the different anxiety
Ancient Indian thought has provided very rich knowledge disorders are summarized in Table I. Some antianxiety drugs
regarding mind and its functioning. From the Vedic period
are effective in all anxiety disorders, whereas some drugs
issues relating to mind, consciousness, understanding of
have only been studied in specific anxiety disorders and thus
human life, its existence and the concept of Atman have
should be reserved for use in these particular disorders.
been widely studied and several explanations to improve
the quality of human life are available in Vedic and Post
Panic disorder and agoraphobia. In acute panic attacks, mouth
Vedic literature. The Bhagvad Gita contains in condensed
desolving short-acting benzodiazepines and reassurance
form all the philosophical and psycholoical wisdom of the
to the patient may be sufficient. SSRIs SNRIs are first-line
Upanishads. Bhagwad Gita describes all aspects of yoga,
treatments for longterm management. Patients should be
psychology and is unique among the psychlogical and
treated for atleast six to eight months or longer to prevent
philosophical teachings for a student of psychotherapy,
relapses.
various aspects of psychotherapeutic techniques are
described in it.
A combination of CBT and anxiolytic medication has been
shown to have the best treatment outcomes.
In this excellent module of Psychotherapy through
18 chapters way of self knowledge, the Yoga of action
In GAD and Social anxiety disorder (SAD): Choice of Drugs for
(karma) knowledge of renunciation and action, the path of
Management are SSRIs, SNRIs and pregabalin. Buspirone and
meditation, knowledge of the absolute and eternal, yogic
hydroxyzine are second line treatment. Benzodiazepines
vision, yoga of devotion, profound knowledge of three
should only be used for long-term treatment when other
Gunas and the wisdom of renunciation and liberation
drugs or CBT have not shown results.
have been described at length, which leads to personality
transformation of Arjuna. In the modern psychotherapy,
Specific phobia: Specific phobia should be treated with
cognitive restructuring is the goal of psychotherapy, which
behaviour therapy including systematic desensatisation.
has been accomplished a great deal through Bhagwad Gita.
SSRIs or short acting benzodiazepines should be tried in
cases not responding to behaviour therapy.
Prekshadhayan
A Jain Meditational technique propounded by Acharya
OCD: Choice of treatments is the SSRIs and the TCA
Mahapragya, which includes relaxation, meditation,
clomipramine. Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) and
yoga, asanas and pranayam, a comprehensive capsule of
behavioural management has been tried in management of exposure and response prevention are other proven
GAD. On mental level, it proves to be an applied method techniques of management.
to train the mind to concentrate. It offers a way to treat
serious anxiety disorders with or without drugs. Large trials PTSD: Choice of treatments includes the SSRIs and
of this technique are still awaited. At present, few scientific venlafaxine. Therapeutic conversation, psychoeducation
studies are available. and regrief therapy are non-pharmacological treatment
techniques advocated.
5. Providing Education To The Patient And Family
This seemingly unimportant aspect is most relevant to TREATMENT UNDER SPECIAL CONDITIONS
Indian settings where awareness of psychiatric illness and its (FLOW CHART-3)
realization and need for treatment with compliance is little.
Many feel dejected, angry, isolated and may have suicidal Pregnancy.The use of SSRIs and TCAs in pregnancy does not
ideas. Family and the patient need to be told that this is like have increased risk for malformations. It is recommended to
any other illness that needs treatment and success depends avoid paroxetine alprazolam use among pregnant women
on compliance. or women planning to become pregnant.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S71
Gautam, et al.: CPG for GAD & Panic Disorder
Anxiety Disorder
Child and Adolescent Geriatric Suicidal Patient Substance use
Population Population disorder
Scant Literature in West Lower initial dose Adequate dose Treatment of substance
and India Lower target dose Inform patient’s family use disorder essential
SSRIs Gradual escalation
BZDs
Flowchart 3: Management of Anxiety Disorders in Special Population
Breast-feeding. SSRIs and TCAs are excreted into breast milk, possibilities of recurrence, response to triggers and his/
they do not cause any harm to the new born because the her ability to cope with the situation should be discussed
concentration in breast milk is very small however infants of at length. Patient’s personal view should be included in
mothers on benzodiazepines, should be observed for signs decesion making of stopping the treatment. Patient should
of sedation, lethargy, poor suckling, and weight loss, and if be encouraged to adapt alternative methods of anxiety
high doses have to be used and long-term administration is reduction like yoga, pranayam, relaxation techniques
required, breast feeding should probably be discontinued. including progressive muscular relaxation (PMR)/Shavasan
etc. which can be mastered by him before weaning off the
Treating children and adolescents. Choice of treatment smallest dose of antianxiety medication. Mindfulness-Based
should be SSRIs concerns about increased risk of suicidal Cognitive Behavior Therapy (MBCBT) for reducing cognitive
ideation and behavior have ben reported therefore careful and somatic anxiety and modifying dysfunctional cognitions
monitoring is advisable, presence of comorbid depression in patients with anxiety disorders has been tried where in
should be looked fore. different versions of mindfulness meditation, cognitive
restructuring, and strategies to handle worry, such as,
Treating the elderly. Elderly have increased sensitivity for worry postponement, worry exposure, and problem solving
anticholinergic properties, an increased risk for orthostatic have been employed. However, these studies are on small
hypotension, and ECG changes during treatment with TCAs, number of patients and need carefull review for further
and possible paradoxical reactions to benzodiazepines, application.
which include depression, with or without suicidal
tendencies, phobias, aggressiveness, or violent behavior. MANAGEMENT OF SIDE EFFECTS OF
Thus, treatment with TCAs or benzodiazepines is less MEDICATION
favorable, while SSRIs appear to be safe.
Diffrent side effects will emerge with different category of
Treatment of patients with severe Physical disease. Patients antianxiety medication. They should be carefully observed
with cardiovascular, cerebrovascular and endocrine disease, and addressed to. Side effects of medication can be drug
related or dose related. If it is drug, related, alternative class
irritable bowel syndrome, malignency, stroke, chronic
of drug should be tried for adequate length of time. If it is
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) hyperthyroidism
dose related then the dose of the drug has to be reduced.
may have associated anxiety reactions with their somatic
disease state. Such anxiety disorders may compound the
Things to remember for GAD:
management and the prognosis of these primary conditions.
1. Anticholinergic and cardiovascular side effects to be
Advocated pharmacological agents in such conditions
kept in mind when using tricyclic and Tetra cyclic for
include SSRIs and Venlafaxine.
side effects. Precaution in suicidal patients.
2. Long-term treatment may be required.
WHEN TO STOP TREATMENT
3. Psychopharmacological therapy combined with
psychotherapy works better.
Decesion to stop treatment will depend on clinical
response of the patients. Usualy the treatment is stopped
SUGGESTED READING
in a tapering manner after atleast 6 months stability of
clinical improvement and asymptomatic status of the
1. Guidelines for the pharmacological treatment of anxiety disorders,
patient. Before stopping the treatment, the nature of illness obsessive – compulsive disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder in
S72 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Gautam, et al.: CPG for GAD & Panic Disorder
primary care review article international Journal of Psychiatry in Clinical management of generalized anxiety disorder. J. Clin. Psychopharmacology,
Practice, 2012; 16: 77–84. 10, 101S.
2. Generalised anxiety disorder in adults – diagnosis and management www. 9. Caulpepper.L. (2003) Evidence for using Atypical Antipsychotic in mood
bpac.org.nz keyword: anxiety. and anxiety disorders. Primary Care Companion, Journal of Clinical
3. Spirituality and mental health edited by Dr. Avdhesh Sharma, Published by Psychiatry,5, Supl(3) page 27-32.
Indian J Psychiatry. 2008 Oct-Dec; 50(4): 233–237. 10. Chandrashekhar,C.R. and Reddy,M.V.(1998). Prevalence of mental and
4. Indian Culture and Psychiatry, Shiv Gautam, Nikhil Jain, Published behavioural disorders in India: A meta-analysis,UP, 40(2):149-157.
by Indian Journal of Psychiatry year 2010 Volume 52 Issue 7 11. Levitt.J.T., Hoffman,E.C., Grisham, J.R., Barlow.D.H. (2001) Empirically
(P. 309-3013). supported treatments for panic disorder. Psychiatr. Ann.,31,(8): 478.
5. Prekshadhyan, Manaswi Gautam, published in spirituality and mental 12. Ontario guidelines for Management of Anxiety disorder.Primary
health by Indian psychiatric society task force editor Avdesh Sharma care(2000). 1st Edn. Pollock.M.H., Mathews.J., Scotter (1998) Gabapentin
(2008-2009): 163-176. as it for Anxiety disorder.American Journal of Psychiatry, 155,992.
6. Mental Health in Ancient india and its relevence to modern psychiatry. 13. Sahasi.G., Chawala.H.M., Dhar.N.K., Katiyar.M. (1991) Comparative
Shiv Gautam Presidential Address, Indian Journal of Psychiatry (1999) study of progressive relaxation and yogic techniques of relaxation in
41 (1) 5-18 and “spirituality and mental health, task force (2008-2009): management of anxiety Neurosis, UP 33 (1);27-32.
25-52. 14. World Health Organization (1992) The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and
7. ORIGINAL ARTICLE: Role of antioxidants in generalised anxiety disorder Behavioural Disorders: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines.
and depression Medhavi Gautam, Mukta Agrawal, Manaswi Gautam, World Health Organization, Geneva.
Praveen Sharma, Anita Sharma Gautam, Shiv Gautam Indian Journal of 15. Vahia.V.N., Shetty.H.K., Motiwala, S., Thakkar.G., Fernandes.L,
Psychiatry, Year 2012, Volume 54, Issue 3 [p. 244-247]. Sharma, C.J. (1993) Effect of Meditation in Generalised Anxiety
8. Rickels, K., Schweizer.E. (1990) The clinical course and long term Disorder,35 (2);87-92.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S73