Downloadedfromhttp://journals.lww.com/indianjpsychiatrybyBhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=on05/12/2022
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Management of Schizophrenia
Sandeep Grover, Subho Chakrabarti, Parmanand Kulhara, Ajit Avasthi
Department of Psychiatry, PGIMER, Chandigarh
previous guidelines. These guidelines are not particularly
Participants of expert group on CPG for Schizophrenia
2202/21/50no=IeLZlwM2jGgdXZQggba0y1CV3fC4lFSvT7iyRdO0D3i3DHrQlI/pQYnWA1XCwyCh0iMX4oHIsbgZEhLJk+a4NfQt1muoEz1vaKHPe5fMDhBybyrtaihcyspjnaidni/moc.wwl.slanruoj//:ptthmorfdedaolnwoD applicable to any specific treatment setting and may need
minor modifications to suit the needs of patients in a
B.N. Gangadhar, P.K. Dalal, Lalit Batra, Kishore Gujar,
specific setting. The recommendations are primarily meant
O.P Singh, Bharat Singh, Abhay Matkar, Devendra
for adult patients. The needs of children or the elderly with
Vijayvargiya, R.K. Solanki, Adarsh Tripathi
schizophrenia may be different. Finally, it is expected that
recommendations made will have to be tailored to suit the
INTRODUCTION
needs of individual patients.
Schizophrenia is a serious mental disorder with prevalence
Assessment and evaluation (table-1)
rates of 2-3 per 1000 reported from India. The impact of
A comprehensive assessment of the patient and his/her
schizophrenia on patients, their families and the wider
caregivers needs to be carried out. The cornerstone of this
society are no different from what has been observed in
assessment is a detailed history and physical and mental state
the rest of the world. However, resource constraints,
examinations. Efforts should be made to obtain information
poverty, lack of education and inadequate access to health
from all sources, especially the family. Wherever possible,
care facilities for patients make the problem of providing
diagnosis of schizophrenia be preferably made according
care particularly daunting in India. In 2005, the Indian
to current diagnostic criteria, as such a diagnosis is more
Psychiatric Society came up with treatment guidelines for
reliable. A reliable diagnosis facilitates communication
schizophrenia tailored to meet the requirements of our
among clinicians, and allows for better applicability
patients in the context of prevailing existing resources.
of evidence-based recommendations. Many clinical
There have been several developments in the management conditions that may mimic schizophrenia include mood
of schizophrenia since then. These new set of guidelines disorders, substance-induced psychoses and psychoses
attempt to update the previous guidelines by emphasizing secondary to physical illnesses. These should be ruled out
what is new in the field. These guidelines ought to be read as far as possible by history, examination and additional
in conjunction with the earlier version of the treatment investigations. In some instances a definitive diagnosis may
guidelines on schizophrenia as developed and published by need time. Further, because of the enormous psychosocial
the Indian Psychiatric Society in the year 2005. consequences a diagnosis of schizophrenia needs to be
made with great caution and sensitivity. In doubtful cases,
SCOPE OF THIS DOCUMENT a medication-free observation period can be considered.
However, consideration of medication free period need to
The major emphasis of the current guidelines is on areas in be balanced against the risks of delaying treatment or the
the management of schizophrenia, which have witnessed potential for harm to self and others in acutely ill patients.
significant developments since the publication of the It is important to remember that diagnosis is not a one-time
affair, but a continuous process. Accordingly, based on the
Address for correspondence: subsequent information from patients and caregivers, and
Dr. Ajit Avasthi, Department of Psychiatry,
on repeated clinical evaluations the diagnosis may need re-
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
evaluation.
Chandigarh ‑ 160 012, India.
E‑mail: drajitavasthi@yahoo.co.in
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Access this article online Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 3.0 License, which allows
Quick Response Code others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, as long as the
Website: author is credited and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
www.indianjpsychiatry.org For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com
How to cite this article: Grover S, Chakrabarti S, Kulhara
DOI:
P, Avasthi A. Clinical Practice Guidelines for Management of
10.4103/0019‑5545.196972
Schizophrenia. Indian J Psychiatry 2017;59:19-33.
© 2017 Indian Journal of Psychiatry | Published by Wolters Kluwer ‑ Medknow S19
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
The assessment should cover all other areas such as Table 1: Components of assessment and evaluation
symptom dimensions, symptom-severity, comorbid
Basic assessments
psychiatric and medical conditions, particularly comorbid • Comprehensive assessment of both patients and caregivers
substance abuse, the risk of harm to self or others, level of • Complete history with information from all possible sources
functioning and the socio-cultural milieu of the patient. A • Physical examination‑ record data such as blood pressure, weight and
wherever indicated body mass index and waist circumference
high index of suspicion along with thorough assessment can
• Mental state examination
help in detecting most patients with comorbid substance
• Establish diagnosis according to current diagnostic criteria
abuse/dependence. Wherever, facilities are available, urine • Differential diagnosis by ruling out secondary psychoses
or blood screens (with prior consent) can be used to confirm • Areas to be evaluated: symptom‑severity, symptom‑dimensions (reality
the presence of comorbid substance abuse/dependence. A distortion, disorganization, negative, depressive and cognitive
symptoms), comorbid physical, psychiatric and substance use
thorough physical examination need to be done to rule out
conditions, risk of harm to self and others, level of functioning and
presence of any physical illness and also to rule out psychoses
socio‑cultural milieu of the patient
secondary to physical illnesses. This may be supplemented • Basic investigations: haemogram, blood sugars and lipid levels, liver
by the judicious use of investigations. Wherever possible, functions, renal functions, electrocardiogram (focus on QTc)
unstructured assessments need to be supplemented by • Assessments of caregivers: knowledge and understanding of the illness,
attitudes and beliefs regarding treatment, impact of the illness on them,
ratings on appropriate standardized rating scales. Other
personal and social resources
options such as detailed cognitive testing can be done if
• Ongoing assessments: response to treatment, side effects, treatment
required and feasible. The use of neuroimaging may be adherence, the impact of patient’s immediate environment, disability
indicated in those with first-episode psychosis, neurological assessments, other health‑care needs, ease of access and relationship
signs, non-response to treatment and elderly patients. with the treatment team
Additional/Optional assessments
• Use of standardized rating scales to rate all aspects of the illness
Assessments of caregivers may focus on areas such as their
• Psychological testing for cognitive functions
knowledge and understanding of the illness, their attitudes • Neuroimaging especially in those with first‑episode psychosis,
and beliefs regarding treatment, the impact of the illness on neurological signs, non‑response to treatment and elderly patients
them and their personal and social resources.
Table 2: Some indications for inpatient care during
It is important to remember that assessment is an ongoing
acute episodes
process. As the treatment progresses other areas such as response
• Presence of suicidal behaviour which puts the life of the patient at risk
to treatment, side effects, treatment adherence, the impact of
• Presence of severe agitation or violence which puts the life of others at risk
patient’s immediate environment, disability assessments, other
• Refusal to eat which puts the life of patient at risk
health-care needs, ease of access and relationship with the • Severe malnutrition
treatment team may need to be assessed separately. • Patient unable to care for self to the extent that she/he requires constant
supervision or support
• Catatonia
Formulating a treatment plan (figure 1)
• Presence of general medical or comorbid psychiatric conditions which
Formulation of treatment plan involves deciding about
make management unsafe and ineffective in the outpatient setting
treatment setting, treatments to be used and areas to be
addressed. Patients, caregivers and staff involved in care
than the patient and/or family need to be informed about
may be consulted while preparing the treatment plan.
such a need and admission in nearest available inpatient
Treatment plans be needs-based, practical, feasible and
facility may be facilitated.
flexible. These should be continuously re-evaluated and
modified as required.
Options for management for schizophrenia
Treatment options for management of schizophrenia
Choice of treatment settings
can be broadly classified as antipsychotic medications,
The basic principle while choosing a treatment-setting
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), adjunctive medications
is to provide care in the least restrictive setting, which
nevertheless meets the needs of patients and caregivers. The and psychosocial interventions (table-3).
commonest treatment settings would be either outpatient
clinics or inpatient wards. In some instances resources for Pharmacological treatment
long-term inpatient care, or community or residential care Choice of antipsychotic medication
may be available. The bulk of the patients would probably The essential choice is between using an antipsychotic
receive treatment in outpatient settings. Given their severe belonging to the class of typical antipsychotics (FGA- first-
shortage, inpatient beds are likely to be scarce. Common generation antipsychotic) or from the atypical group (SGA-
indications for inpatient care during acute episodes are second-generation antipsychotic). Since the publication of
shown in table-2. Whenever possible patient admitted to the previous guideline there is somewhat greater clarity on
the inpatient setting should have accompanying family this matter. The bulk of the evidence including large-scale
caregivers. In case inpatient care facilities are not available, real-world studies indicates that there is very little difference
S20 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
Patient with Psychotic features
Consider differential diagnoses like
• Organic Mental Conditions
• Acute and transient psychotic disorder
• Persistent Delusional disorder
• Schizoaffective disorder
• Severe depression with psychotic symptoms
• Mania with psychotic symptoms
• Drug induced psychosis
Establish the diagnosis of schizophrenia
Assessment
• Severity of illness
• Risk of harm to self and others
• Comorbid substance use/dependence
• Level of functioning
• Detailed Physical examination
• Record- blood pressure, weight and wherever indicated body mass index and waist
circumference
• Mental Status Examination
• Investigations- haemogram, liver function test, renal function test, fasting blood glucose
level, electrocardiogram (focus on QTc)
• Treatment history- response to previous medication trials, compliance, side effects, etc.
• Patient’s and caregivers beliefs about the cause of illness and beliefs about the treatment
• Assessment for social support, stigma, coping
• Assessment of caregiver burden, coping and distress
• Decide about treatment setting- consider inpatient care in case of suicidality, severe agitation
and violence, malnutrition, catatonia, patient unable to care for self to the extent that she/he
requires constant supervision or support, comorbid general medical conditions making
management difficult at the outpatient setting
• Liaison with other specialists depending on the need of the patient
Pharmacological Management Electroconvulsive therapy Non-Pharmacological
• Choose an antipsychotic based on past • Catatonia, affective Management
treatment response, past history of side symptoms, rapid control • Psychoeducation
effects, cost, comorbidity, Patient/family of symptoms, suicidality, • Psychosocial
preference, preferred route of past response to ECT, intervention
administration, availability, current metabolic augmentation etc.
profile, past history of compliance,
treatment resistance
Figure-1: Initial evaluation and management plan for schizophrenia
Table 3: Options for management for schizophrenia in terms of efficacy, adherence and other subjective aspects
between the FGA and the SGA group, or between individual
Antipsychotic medications
First‑generation antipsychotic medications (Oral/parenteral/depot or long antipsychotics belonging to either group. The only exception
acting‑ preparations) to this trend is clozapine, which appears to be more
Second‑generation antipsychotic medications (Oral/parenteral/depot or long efficacious than any other antipsychotic in patients with
acting‑ preparations)
treatment resistance. It follows from this that the choice of
Somatic treatments
the antipsychotic will depend on factors other than efficacy.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
Adjunctive medications Some of these factors are included in table-4.
Anticholinergics, antidepressants, benzodiazepines, hypnotic‑sedatives,
anticonvulsants, lithium carbonate Dose
Psychosocial interventions
The recommended dose of various oral antipsychotics
Family intervention, cognitive behavioural therapy, social skills training,
available in India is shown in table-5. In general patients
cognitive remediation, individual therapy, group therapy, vocational
rehabilitation, early‑intervention programmes, case management, with first-episode psychosis respond to lower doses. The use
community mental‑health teams, crisis resolution teams of high or very high doses (mega doses) of antipsychotics,
Other measures if required, may be used with caution in exceptional
Lifestyle and dietary modifications
circumstances. It is noted that Indian patients require lower
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S21
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
doses of antipsychotic drugs compared to patients from the Table 4: Factors that influence selection of
West. Although this is suggested by clinical experience and antipsychotics
pharmacokinetic studies of Asian patients, there is little
• Past treatment response
evidence for, or against this supposition from clinical trials. • Cost of treatment, affordability
• Psychiatric comorbidity
Route of administration • Medical comorbidity
• Side effects
Acutely agitated patients often require parenteral
• Patient or family preference
administration of antipsychotics to rapidly control the
• Preferred route of administration
behavioural disturbance. Liquid or mouth-dissolving • Concomitant medications
formulations are often helpful in non-compliant patients. • Non‑adherence
Depot preparations are generally not used in acutely • Treatment resistance
agitated patients except zuclopenthixol acetate, which has
a half-life of about 20 hours. In general, it is recommended
Table 5: Recommended therapeutic dose ranges for
that one drug is to be used by one route in order to minimise
various antipsychotics
drug interactions and simplify clinical observations.
Usual daily dose Maximum
(in mg/day) daily dose
Depot preparations (table-6) are often helpful in ensuring
First Generation Antipsychotics (FGAs)
medication-compliance and may be used in situations
Chlorpromazine 300‑800 800
where compliance is a problem. Depot injectables may Haloperidol 5‑20 20
also be used if patients/relatives indicate a preference for Penfluridol 20‑60 mg/week 250 mg/week
this kind of treatment. Test doses are administered at the Perphenazine 12‑64 64
start of treatment. When used, depot preparations need to Pimozide 4‑10 10
Thioridazine 300‑800 800
be prescribed within the standard recommended dosage
Trifluoperazine 15‑30 30
and interval range to achieve optimum effectiveness in Zuclopenthixol 10‑50 50
preventing relapse. Second Generation Antipsychotics (SGAs)
Amisulpride 50‑800 1200
Adequate antipsychotic trial Aripiprazole 10‑30 30
Asenapine 10‑20 20
The minimum recommended duration of treatment to
Blonanserin 2‑8 24
consider it to be an effective trial for all antipsychotics is use
Clozapine 150‑600 900
of medication in the highest tolerable dose for 6-8 weeks, Iloperidone 12‑24 24
with the exception of clozapine, where the minimum period Olanzapine 10‑30 30
of treatment is at least 3-6 months. Paliperidone 3‑12 12
Quetiapine 300‑800 800
Risperidone 2‑8 16
Response
Ziprasidone 80‑200 200
Antipsychotics are known to produce a significant remission Zotepine 75‑300 300
of positive symptoms. This could thus be a reasonable goal
of treatment during the acute phase. Antipsychotics are less
effective in management of negative symptoms, therefore a
Table 6: Antipsychotic depot preparations available in
mild to moderate reduction in negative symptoms is often
India
acceptable. Response indicators for other aspects of the
Name of antipsychotic Usual 2‑4 weekly dose in mg
illness (e.g. cognitive symptoms) are not clear. Patients on
antipsychotics need to be monitored regularly to ascertain Zuclopenthixol decanoate 200
Paliperidone palmitate 234 initially followed by 117 monthly
the level of response and the emergence of side effects.
Fluphenazine decanoate 12.5‑50
Haloperidol decanoate 50
Non-response (Figure-2) Risperidone depot 25‑50
In case a patient fails to respond to an antipsychotic (RisperidalConsta)
medication, poor compliance or non-compliance need Olanzapine pamoate 210‑405
to be evaluated prior to switching the medication to
another antipsychotic. If a patient is found to have poor with good compliance, a change in antipsychotic may be
compliance or non-compliance to medications, all efforts considered. Clozapine need to be considered after failure of
are to be made to understand the causes responsible for sequential trials of 2 antipsychotics (at least one of which is
lack of compliance and appropriate steps need to be a SGA). Clozapine may also be considered earlier in patients
taken to handle the problem. However, if a patient fails to who are violent, at risk for suicide, not responding to their
respond to an adequate trial of an antipsychotic medication current medication and those experiencing intolerable side
(i.e., adequate dose for at least 6-8 weeks duration) taken effects with two different classes of antipsychotics.
S22 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
Patient given an adequate Adequate Response
antipsychotic trial (adequate dose for • Continue with the same
atleast 6 weeks duration) dose of antipsychotic
medication and keep on
monitoring the side effects
Non-response to treatment
Evaluation
• Re-evaluate the diagnosis
• Medication compliance
True Non-response Pseudo Non-response due to poor compliance
• Change the antipsychotic • Evaluate the causes, address the same and
medication ensure compliance
• In case of poor compliance due to intolerable
side effects –consider change of antipsychotic
(oral/depot)
Failure of 2 adequate trials of Adequate Response
antipsychotic, one of which is SGA • Continue with the same dose of
• Consider clozapine antipsychotic medication and keep
on monitoring the side effects
Inadequate Response to clozapine
• Consider combining clozapine with ECT
or another antipsychotic medication
• More intensive psychosocial intervention
Figure 2: Evaluation of patient with non-response to antipsychotic medications
Combination of antipsychotics is not recommended. It is better to start these drugs when
There is limited evidence for the efficacy of combination the patient actually develops extrapyramidal side effects.
of antipsychotics. In the initial phase, a clinician may Whenever anticholinergic agents are required, use may be
be compelled to use a combination of antipsychotics to limited to lowest possible doses and for shortest possible
manage agitation, but caution need to be exercised while time.
doing so. These should be used on SOS basis and for
shortest possible time. Combinations of antipsychotics for ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY (ECT)
prolonged periods may be avoided, except in patients not
responding to clozapine. As in many other developing countries ECT is used quite
frequently in schizophrenia in India. The evidence for
ADJUNCTIVE MEDICATIONS efficacy of ECT in the acute phase of schizophrenia is
somewhat controversial. There is evidence for augmentation
Although antipsychotic agents are the mainstay of and acceleration of response. ECT is used in conjunction
treatment of schizophrenia, management may involve with antipsychotics in the acute phase, but the extent of the
use of adjunctive treatments like with antidepressants, benefit of adding ECT to antipsychotics is unclear and the
mood stabilizers or benzodiazepines. However, these can positive effects seem to last only for the first few weeks of
be used with proper rationale and for shortest possible treatment. However, there may be some merit in adding ECT
duration. At every assessment a proper evaluation need to the treatment regimen in patients who respond poorly to
to be done for the continuation of the same. Lithium and antipsychotics. The more unequivocal indications for ECT
other mood stabilizers can be prescribed in agitated, in combination with antipsychotics are included in table-7.
overactive patients or those with affective symptoms ECT is not useful in chronic schizophrenia and there is not
responding poorly to their current drug. Benzodiazepines enough evidence to recommend its use in the longer term
can be useful in managing agitation and sleep disturbance. except in exceptional circumstances. Finally, whenever ECT
Antidepressants may be of use in post-psychotic depression is used adequate information and support for patients and
and may be avoided when the patient has florid psychotic caregivers, informed consent, proper administration and
symptoms. In general prophylactic use of anticholinergics careful monitoring of response and side effects be done.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S23
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
PSYCHOEDUCATION FOR PATIENTS AND OR mental-health teams and of crisis resolution teams have been
FAMILY (TABLE‑8) proven to be useful in the management of schizophrenia.
The usefulness and delivery of psychosocial treatments has
Psychoeducation may be considered both for the patient and probably not attracted the research attention it deserves in the
family members. The aim is to educate the patient and family Indian context. Nevertheless, there is ample Indian evidence
about the illness. Simple and brief explanations about the and experience with family treatments, rehabilitation and
nature of the patient’s illness, treatments, likely side effects, other modalities such as community programmes, yoga and
likely length of treatment etc. can be offered. Relatives also cognitive remediation. Based on these data, psychosocial
need to be given time to confront the painful fact of the illness, interventions, from the simple to the complex, can be
and what it entails for the patient and the family as a whole. recommended for patients with schizophrenia and their
It is important that professionals are careful and considerate, families. An approach which prioritizes the needs of patients
but clear and thorough in their use of clinical language and and their families could be followed.
in the explanations they provide. No blame is to be attached
to the family. Treatment adherence will be another main FAMILY INTERVENTIONS
objective at this stage. Prior to every session, feedback of the
previous sessions may be taken and psychoeducation is to be There has been a long tradition in India of involving
tailored to the needs of the patient and the caregivers. families in the care of their members with mental illness.
There are several studies documenting the delivery of
PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS family interventions. Several formats of predominantly
psychoeducational treatments such as informal or
Psychosocial interventions are acknowledged to be an unstructured programmes, structured treatments, group-
integral part of management of schizophrenia. Different based interventions, and integrated psychosocial treatments
psychosocial interventions including family treatments, have been tried. From the number of controlled trials it
cognitive behavioural therapy, social skills training, cognitive appears that a wide range of interventions and treatment-
remediation, individual supportive therapy, group therapy, delivery, from the simple to the complex, may be useful
vocational rehabilitation, case management, use of community in the Indian context. The basic emphasis need to be on
continued contact and medication adherence while offering
emotional and practical support. A needs-based approach,
Table 7: Possible indications of use of ECT in patients of
in which interventions are tailored to the background
schizophrenia
and needs of the families, is more likely to enhance their
• Catatonic symptoms
acceptability and positively influence the readiness of
• Affective symptoms
• Need for rapid control of symptoms families to participate in such interventions.
• Presence of suicidal behaviour which puts the life of the patient at risk
• Presence of severe agitation or violence which puts the life of others at risk ADVISE FOR LIFE STYLE AND DIETARY
• Refusal to eat which puts the life of patient at risk
MODIFICATIONS
• History of good response in the past
• Patients not responding to adequate trial of an antipsychotic medication
• Augmentation of partial response to antipsychotic medication All the patients are to be advised for a change in the life
• Clozapine resistant schizophrenia style and diet to reduce the risk of metabolic side effects
• Not able to tolerate antipsychotic medications and cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. These include
physical exercises, dietary modifications and abstinence
from smoking etc.
Table 8: Basic components of Psychoeducation
• Assessing the knowledge of the patient and caregivers about aetiology,
REHABILITATION
treatment and prognosis
• Introducing the diagnosis of schizophrenia into discussion
• Discussing about various symptom dimensions Similar to family treatments, rehabilitation programmes
• Providing information about aetiology need to be be culturally moulded and adapted to the
• Providing information about treatment in terms of available options, their
needs of patients and their families. However, unlike family
efficacy/effectiveness, side effects, duration of use
interventions, resources for more elaborate rehabilitation
• Discussing about importance of medication and treatment compliance
• Providing information about possible course and long term outcome strategies may not be available in every centre. Nevertheless,
• Discussing about problems of substance abuse, marriage and other issues relatively simple and inexpensive strategies can form a part
• Discussing about Communication patterns, problem solving, disability of the overall psychosocial intervention package.
benefits
• Discussing about relapse and how to identify the early signs of relapse
INDIVIDUAL SUPPORTIVE THERAPY
• Dealing with day today stress
• Improving insight into illness
• Handling expressed emotions and improving communication A supportive empathic relationship between patients and
• Enhancing adaptive coping to deal with persistent/residual symptoms professionals, in which good listening promotes a lasting
S24 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
therapeutic alliance is an essential part of good practice. Table 9: Recommendations about psychosocial
Additional elements could include support and advice, interventions
encouraging continued engagement, treatment-adherence
• Assessment of psychosocial factors involving the patient and the family is
and healthy lifestyles. Efforts to minimize stress may also an integral part of psychosocial interventions.
be beneficial. Individual support along with medication is • There is a wide range of interventions that have proved useful in Indian
the most commonly practiced treatment in schizophrenia. settings
• Choice of the intervention will be shaped by the needs of patients and
Patients and families consistently rank individual support as
their families as well as the resources available.
among the most highly valued services offered to patients
• Basic components of any intervention include: promoting a therapeutic
with schizophrenia. alliance with the patient and the family, encouraging ongoing
engagement, information about various aspects of the illness, focusing on
OTHER PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS treatment‑adherence and healthy lifestyles, and offering emotional and
practical support.
Other interventions that hold promise are home-based
care, support groups for caregivers, community-based Table 10: Factors associated with poor medication
interventions, cognitive training or remediation, and yoga. compliance
More research on the efficacy of these strategies and their
Demographic risk factors
wider implementation is needed.
• Younger age, male gender, unemployment, lower socioeconomic status
Patient related factors
Basic components of any psychosocial intervention are • K nowledge about illness and treatment, perceived need for
depicted in table-9. For more specific recommendations treatment (insight), motivation, beliefs about treatment risks and benefits,
past experiences/“transference”, past history of adherence, self‑stigma
other sources may be consulted.
Social risk factors
• Living independently, poor social support, poor financial support
TREATMENT ADHERENCE Clinical risk factors
• Poorer premorbid functioning, earlier age of onset, prior history of
Adherence is defined as “the extent to which the non‑adherence
Symptom‑related risk factors
patients’ behaviour, in terms of regular clinic visit, taking
• Lack of insight, paranoia, grandiose delusions, conceptual
medications, following diets, executing lifestyle changes,
disorganization, impaired cognition, substance abuse, comorbidities,
coincide with the clinical prescription”. Non-adherence depression, refractoriness, spontaneous remissions
in this context thus denotes failure to enter a treatment Treatment‑related risk factors
programme, premature termination of treatment, or • Medication side effects, poor treatment alliance, complex dosing,
negative experience of medication, route of administration, length of
incomplete implementation of instructions, including
treatment, cost of treatment, number of medications
those that pertain to medication administration. Evidence Service‑related risk factors
suggests that about half of the patients with schizophrenia • High cost of medication, poor accessibility of treatment services
do not comply with the treatment recommendations, Family/caregivers‑related risk factors
about one-third miss their appointments with the • Lack of supervision, negative attitudes towards treatment, lack of
knowledge about medicines, nature of relationship with patient,
clinicians and 20-60% of patients drop out from treatment.
perceived need for treatment, beliefs about benefits and risks with
Common factors associated with poor medication non-
continued treatment, involvement in treatment, stigma, financial
compliance are shown in table-10. Factors consistently constraints, support from other sources
linked to non-adherence include poor insight, negative Clinician/provider related factors
attitude or subjective response to medication, comorbid • Therapeutic alliance, frequency and nature of contact with clinicians,
expected duration of treatment, duration of past treatment, accessibility
substance abuse, and poor therapeutic alliance. Clinicians
to clinicians and services, reimbursement, psychoeducation and
need to make efforts to reduce the rates of medication
psychosocial treatment, complexity of administration
compliance and treatment non-adherence. It is important
for the clinicians to understand that besides the
or treatment compliance, all efforts need to be made
contextual or situation factors, patient related factors
to understand the reasons behind the same. Proper
and illness related factors, certain clinician related
evaluation of non-adherence need to cover assessment
factors are responsible for poor medication compliance
of familial, social, biological and pharmacological
and higher dropout rates. Some of the common clinician
perspectives. Patients/caregivers concerns need to be
related factors which may be relevant in Indian context
include poor communication between the clinician and addressed by proper psychoeducation and modification of
the patient/caregiver, poor therapeutic alliance and non- pharmacological treatment. Medication compliance can be
collaborative decision-making. Hence, clinicians need to improved by using depot preparations and use of mouth
focus on better communication and improve therapeutic dissolving formulations under supervision. Evidence
alliance with patient and the family to improve overall also suggests beneficial effects of cognitive-behavioural
outcome. Whenever clinicians encounter poor medication approaches and motivational interviewing.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S25
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
PHASES OF ILLNESS/TREATMENT MANAGEMENT IN THE ACUTE PHASE OF
TREATMENT
Management of schizophrenia can be broadly divided into
three phases, i.e., acute phase, continuation treatment or Most patients in this stage are likely to exhibit florid
stabilization phase, maintenance or stable phase. Some psychotic symptoms such as delusions or hallucinations,
patients may present very early in a prodromal phase and disorganized thinking and behavioural disturbances. Their
appropriate strategies for detection and management for functioning may be severely impaired and they can be at
this phase might be required. risk of harming themselves or others. Additionally both the
patient and the family might have considerable difficulty in
Prodromal stage coming to terms with the onset of acute symptoms. The
It is now well known that onset of frank psychosis is often various aspects of management in the acute phase are
preceded by psychological and behavioral abnormalities included in table-11.
involving cognition, emotion, perception, communication,
motivation and sleep. These symptoms may precede the MANAGEMENT IN THE CONTINUATION
psychosis by weeks to years. Various diagnostic systems TREATMENT PHASE
categorise the symptoms as: basic symptoms, attenuated
positive symptoms, brief limited intermittent psychotic This phase begins once the acute symptoms reduce in
symptoms, features of schizotypal personality disorder, severity or remit and conventionally lasts for about 6-12
genetic risk paired with functional deterioration, as well months. Different components of this phase are shown in
as general symptoms that are not specific to psychosis. table-12. Consolidation of remission, continued reduction
Evidence also suggests that many patients with prodrome, in symptoms and prevention of early relapses are the usual
especially the high risk group have higher chance of treatment objectives during this phase. Reduction of stress
conversion to frank schizophrenia. Conversion rates have on the patient and the family by continuing engagement
been reported to range from 25-40%. Further, prodrome
itself may have negative impact on the social, emotional Table 11: Management in the acute phase
and cognitive development. Therefore, now more and
Comprehensive assessment (psychiatric/medical/psychosocial)
more emphasis is laid on early detection and intervention. Deciding on goals of treatment
Factors which have been shown to predict conversion to Patients
psychosis include presence of genetic risk with recent Eliminate/reduce symptoms of schizophrenia and improve the level of
functioning
deterioration in functioning, higher degree of unusual
Promote safety, reduce risk of harm, reduce stress
thought content, suspiciousness/paranoia, presence of
Caregivers
social impairment, longer duration of symptoms, high Minimise caregiver distress
levels of depression, reduced attention and history of Offer help to enable them to cope with the illness in their relative
substance abuse. In terms of management of prodrome Both
Develop a therapeutic alliance and provide opportunities for patients and
it is suggested that treatment ought to be based on the
caregivers to actively engage in treatment
needs of the patient. There is some evidence to suggest
Offer basic information and support tailored to needs of patients and
that use of antipsychotics in prodromal phase can delay the caregivers
conversion to psychosis and antidepressants may be useful Choice of treatment setting
in symptomatic improvement in a sub-group of patients. Antipsychotic treatment
Choice of drug
However, at present evidence for use of antipsychotics in
Dose
prodromal phase is not convincing to recommend its use in
Route of administration
all patients. There is also preliminary evidence to suggest Duration of treatment
the beneficial effect of certain agents like omega-3 fatty Determining response or non‑response
acids. In contrast, evidence suggest that psychological Combining antipsychotics
Use of adjunctive medications when indicated
interventions like cognitive behaviour therapy, cognitive
Use of ECT when indicated
therapy, psychosocial stress management, etc can improve Psychosocial interventions‑ relatively basic and mainly for the purpose
functioning and symptomatology during the prodromal of fulfilling the goals of treatment listed above
phase, although the active components of these treatments Planning for further treatment
are not well known. Accordingly, whenever a patient
presents with symptoms suggestive of prodromal phase of
Table 12: Management in the continuation treatment
schizophrenia, initial management is done in the form of
phase
psychosocial intervention. Use of pharmacotherapy need to
Determining goals
be weighed against the side effects of antipsychotics and
Further assessment
sensitization of dopamine receptors in brain, which can Antipsychotic treatment
possibly lead to supersensitivity psychosis or rapid-onset Psychosocial interventions
psychosis following stoppage of antipsychotic medication. Monitoring for response, side effects and treatment adherence
S26 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
and support and enhancing their adaptation to life after Re-evaluating/modifying the treatment plan: As time elapses
discharge from the hospital, are other important goals of the nature of the illness, problems faced by the relatives,
management. Management includes continuing medication needs of the patient and the family and previously determined
treatment, monitoring of response and side effects and targets are all expected to change. Regular contact, awareness
furthering psychosocial interventions. Medications need and monitoring are needed to detect these changes. Ongoing
to continue preferably at the same dose for the next 6-12 assessment is thus essential. It allows those modifications to be
months. The continued goals of psychosocial treatment are made in the treatment plan, which are required to accommodate
to maintain treatment engagement and adherence, offer any new problems or demands that may have arisen.
support for patients and their families and help prepare
the patient for life in the community. More elaborate Assessments and monitoring: Monitoring is required for
psychosocial interventions may be tried at this stage. assessing response and for side effects that may emerge. Further
Finally, regular monitoring of response, side effects and assessments may be required during this period especially
treatment-adherence needs to continue. if psychosocial treatments are being planned. Information
should be obtained from the patients, family members, and
MANAGEMENT IN THE MAINTENANCE OR other available sources. Frequency of contact will depend
STABLE PHASE on several factors such as clinical state, the distance of the
hospital from the patient’s home, social support available for
During this phase of illness, symptoms are stable and the patient, the type of treatment being administered etc.
usually less severe than in the acute stage. Negative
symptoms may predominate and deficits in social and Antipsychotic treatment
occupational functioning become more apparent. Dose: The dose of the antipsychotic needs to be
Maintaining or improving level of functioning, prevention individualized. A balance has to be struck between the
of recurrences and promoting psychological/personal need to reduce side effects and the need to prevent relapse.
recovery are the major aims of treatment during this Stable patients who do not have positive symptoms may
phase of management. Different components of this phase be candidates for reduction in doses. Doses need to be
are shown in table-13. reduced gradually at the rate of about 20% every 6 months
till a minimum effective dose is reached.
During this phase, follow-ups can be scheduled once every
2-3 months and more frequently in times of crises, or if Reduction of dose/ withdrawal of antipsychotic medication
desired by the family. During this phase of management, may be be undertaken gradually whilst regularly monitoring
regular feedback need to be obtained from the family. signs and symptoms for evidence of potential relapse.
Any new issues that arise are discussed and some of the Following withdrawal from antipsychotic medication,
previous issues may need reemphasis. Management in monitoring for signs and symptoms of potential relapse, need
the stable phase involves carrying forward the gains to continue, for at least 2 years after the last acute episode.
achieved. The management plan should be relooked for Any re-emergence of symptoms is to be immediately treated.
any need for change. It also involves determining the
Duration of treatment: Duration of treatment depends on
goals, continuing further assessment, continuing with
a number of factors and will need to be individualized. The
antipsychotic medications and monitoring of side effects
suggested guidelines are as follows:
and furthering the psychosocial interventions. In addition
• First-episode patients ought to receive 1-2 years of
the management need to focus on rehabilitation, enhancing
maintenance treatment
personal recovery.
• Patients with several episodes or exacerbations are to
receive maintenance treatment for 5 years or longer
Goals of treatment: The goals of treatment during this
after the last episode
phase are to maintain or improve functioning, improve
• Patients with history of aggression or suicide attempts
quality of life and facilitate personal recovery. Psychotic
should receive treatment for longer period or lifelong.
exacerbations need to be effectively treated. Adverse effects
are to be noted and managed.
The usual indications for use of long term or lifelong
antipsychotic medications are shown in table-14.
Table 13: Management in the maintenence phase
• Determining goals Psychosocial interventions
• Re‑evaluating/modifying the treatment plan
The psychosocial interventions started in the previous
• Assessments and monitoring
treatment phases is to be continued and the gains obtained
• Antipsychotic treatment
• Psychosocial interventions till now should be evaluated. Further, the clinicians should
• Monitoring for response, side effects and treatment adherence evaluate as to whether any change is required in terms of
• Early intervention for relapses goals and strategies used.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S27
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
Table 14: Indications for life long/long term use of also seen with SGAs. The acute EPS include acute dystonia,
antipsychotic medications pseudo-parkinsonism and akathisia. Acute EPS is usually
seen during the first few days or weeks of starting treatment,
History of multiple relapses while on treatment
History of relapses when the medications are tapered off is dose dependent and subsides with stoppage of offending
History of 2 episodes in last 5 years agent. Chronic EPS is usually seen after prolonged use
History of suicidal attempts (months to years) of antipsychotics and these include
Presence of residual psychotic symptoms
tardive dyskinesia, tardive dystonia and tardive akathisia. It
Family history of psychosis with poor outcome
is important to note that chronic EPS is not dependent on
Comorbid substance dependence
the dose of antipsychotics and persists even after stopping
the offending agent. It is important to be aware of the risk
Rehabilitation
factors for development of these side effects (table-17).
Facilities for vocational rehabilitation are scarce. However,
if the patient is already working efforts can be made to help
In case a patient is experiencing Parkinsonism during the
out in any problems at the work place, which could be due
initial phase of treatment, the first step of management
to the effects of the illness. If the patient is unemployed,
involves lowering the dose of the antipsychotic medication.
their suitability for work needs to be assessed. If he is
If reduction in dose is associated with unacceptable efficacy
ready for work, he is to be encouraged to seek appropriate
than change of antipsychotic medication may be considered.
jobs. However, if the patient requires rehabilitation then
When change of antipsychotic medication is considered, a
culture-specific characteristics for that rehabilitation medication with lower EPS potential need to be opted. In
programme need to be adopted in order to be successful. patients who respond to an antipsychotic and continue to
experience Parkinsonism, a short course of anticholinergic
Early intervention for relapses medications may be considered.
The management plan needs to be organised to respond as
quickly as possible to any relapses in the patient’s condition. Acute dystonia is also seen during the initial phase
Patients and relatives need to be educated to recognise early of treatment, i.e., after receiving first few doses of
symptoms of a relapse. They need to be told about the need antipsychotics. Acute dystonias respond dramatically
for early intervention in impending cases of relapse. They need to administration of parenteral anticholinergic or
to have easy access to treatment facilities such as emergency antihistaminergic medications. Recurrence of acute
services or inpatient settings, which will cater to the needs dystonias can also be prevented by using a short course of
of a patient on the verge of a relapse. Contact need to be anticholinergic medications.
increased during this phase. Crisis intervention measures
such as brief admissions or frequent home visits need to be First step in management of acute akathisia involves
adopted, whenever feasible. All these are important steps in reduction in dose or changing the antipsychotic to a
efficient detection and treatment of relapses. medication with lower EPS potential. Some patients
may require the use of medications like beta-blockers
SPECIAL SITUATIONS and benzodiazepines like clonazepam or lorazepam for
management of akathisia.
Clinicians often encounter certain clinical situations which
either require special attention or can influence treatment Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS): It is an acute
decisions. Management of these situations is summarised psychiatric emergency, which has been reported to occur more
in table-15. often with FGAs. However, data in the form of case reports
and case series also suggest association of almost all SGAs with
SIDE EFFECTS AND THIER MANAGEMENT development of NMS. Various factors which increase the risk
of NMS are shown in table-18. Management involves stopping
Antipsychotics are associated with many side effects, which the antipsychotic medication, supportive measures and use of
require intervention. Some of the common side effects that bromocriptine, amantadine or dantrolene. Use of lorazepam
can be very distressing to the patients include extrapyramidal may also be helpful and those patients with NMS, who donot
side effects, cardiovascular side effects, sexual dysfunction respond to these treatments, may benefit with ECT.
and metabolic side effects. The cardiovascular side effects
can be life threatening too. The common management Sedation: Many antipsychotics are known to cause sedation
strategies for these side effects are shown in table-16. by virtue of their antihista-minergic, antiadrenergic, and
anti-dopaminergic action. The risk of sedation is high with
Extrapyramidal side effects: Extrapyramidal side effects chlorpromazine, clozapine and quetiapine. Initial strategy
(EPS) are often noted in patients receiving FGAs, especially should be to wait and watch and if this is not beneficial, if
high potency antipsychotic medications. However, EPS is possible dose reduction must be considered.
S28 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
Table 15: Issues related to special situations
Special situation Strategies
First‑episode • Longer duration of untreated psychosis is powerful predictors of subsequent poor outcome
psychosis and early • Attempts need to be made to reduce the duration of untreated psychosis, to promote remission through effective
intervention pharmacological and psychosocial interventions, to maximize functioning, and to prevent relapse and other adverse
outcomes
• Early detection, comprehensive assessment, emphasis on continued engagement, and flexible treatment enable early
intervention services to meet these goals
• It is still not clear for how long patients with first‑episode psychosis are to continue maintenance antipsychotic medication
• A 1‑2 year period is usually recommended, though many patients may require longer periods, and some may require shorter
periods of treatment
Suicidality in • Suicide is more common during the initial period after discharge from the hospital
schizophrenia • Risk factors which have been specifically associated with suicide among patients with schizophrenia include younger age,
high socio‑economic status, high premorbid scholastic achievement and high intelligence quotient, high aspirations and
expectations, early age of onset, younger age at first hospitalization, a chronic and deteriorating course with multiple relapses
and higher level of insight into the illness
• Some of the treatment related issues which have been shown to be associated with suicide include inadequate treatment, poor
medication adherence, poor response to treatment and akathisia
• As it is not possible to predict suicidal behaviour, clinicians need to pay greater attention to presence of suicidal ideations,
which are predictors of suicidal attempt and suicide at every phase of treatment
• High risk management need to be followed during the initial phase of admission and every effort need to be made to retain
the patient in the inpatient set‑up
• Adequate treatment of psychotic symptoms with antipsychotic medication and of depression when present with appropriate
therapy can prevent suicide
• Clozapine has been shown to reduce the risk for suicidal behaviours. Accordingly, it may be preferred for patients who have
multiple suicide attempts or persistently report suicidal ideations.
• Psychoeducation of patient and family need to focus on discussing about warning signs of suicide. Patients
experiencing severe distress due to a feeling of loss, stigma etc., need to be provided psychological support and
monitored closely.
Violence and • All patients are to be evaluated for violence and dangerousness during every assessment, especially during the acute phase of
Aggression in illness
Schizophrenia • Whenever a patient is found to have serious threat for violence or exhibits violence, inpatient management is to be
considered
• Injectable antipsychotics like haloperidol or lorazepam can be used for management of violence and aggression
Comorbid Substance • Presence of substance use disorder is often associated with overall poor outcome of illness
use Disorders • Clinicians also need to pay attention to these disorders and the additional aims of the treatment are abstinence from the
substances or at least harm reduction
• Pharmacological agents shown to be effective for management of detoxification and pharmaco‑prophylaxis for different
substance use disorders may be considered if required
• Psychosocial interventions like relapse prevention counselling, cognitive behavioural interventions and motivation
enhancement treatment may be included in the treatment plan
• Patients are to be continuously monitored for relapse of substance use disorder
Depression • A rational approach to treating depression in schizophrenia first needs to consider and rule out organic conditions, negative
symptoms, antipsychotic associated side effects (dysphoria, akinesia and akathisia), schizoaffective depression, stress‑related
reactions, and an impending psychotic episode
• Controlled trials with SGAs have shown that they are superior to FGAs in their antidepressant efficacy.
• Clozapine may be particularly effective in patients at high risk for suicide
• Antidepressants are generally ineffective during the acute phase. They may even worsen the psychosis, and are best
avoided
• On the other hand, results of controlled trials have demonstrated the efficacy of adjunctive antidepressant therapy in
post‑psychotic depression
• Clinical experience suggests that ECT may be helpful
Catatonia • Whenever a patient with schizophrenia presents with catatonia, all possible differential diagnosis for catatonia is to be
considered. Appropriate investigations may be carried out and the underlying causes are to be managed
• Initial management may involve use of benzodiazepines, especially lorazepam, which leads to symptomatic relief in
significant proportion of cases
• In case the catatonia does not respond to benzodiazepines or relapse after stopping benzodiazepines, ECT is to be
considered
Negative symptoms • First step in management of predominant negative symptoms is to rule out secondary negative symptoms. However, if
negative symptoms persist, they are presumed to be primary negative symptoms of the deficit state
• No treatments have proven efficacy for management of primary negative symptoms, although some benefit has been reported
with clozapine and amisulpride
• Psychosocial interventions in the form of social skill training, token economy may be attempted
Contd...
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S29
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
Table 15: Contd...
Special situation Strategies
Obsessive • Obsessive compulsive disorder/Obsessive compulsive symptoms are common in patients with schizophrenia and these may
compulsive be part of the prodrome of schizophrenia, may be part of clinical manifestation of schizophrenia along with other symptoms,
symptoms in may be treatment emergent or may precede the onset of schizophrenia
schizophrenia • Treatment emergent obsessive compulsive symptoms are commonly reported with SGAs like clozapine, olanzapine and
risperidone
• There is little evidence in the form of randomized controlled trials for management of obsessive compulsive symptoms in
schizophrenia
• In general it is suggested that if the obsessive compulsive symptoms appear to be part and parcel of schizophrenia, initially
patients may be treated with antipsychotics only and the obsessive compulsive symptoms need to be monitored
• If the obsessive compulsive symptoms are considered to be treatment emergent then reduction in dose of antipsychotic,
change of antipsychotic or use of antiobsessional agents are to be considered
• Among the antiobsessional agents, there is some data for the efficacy of clomipramine and fluvoxamine
• Cognitive behaviour therapy in the form of exposure and response prevention has also been tried with beneficial effects
Comorbid Physical • Patients with schizophrenia have high rate of physical illnesses
illnesses • All patients need to receive thorough assessment for possible physical illnesses and depending on the feasibility may be
investigated as per the requirement
• Those with comorbid physical illnesses need to be continuously monitored during all the phases of treatment
• Comorbid physical illnesses and concomitant medications need to be taken into account while selecting the treatment setting
and antipsychotic medication per se
Treatment‑resistance • The first step in the management of treatment‑resistance is to establish that the disorder has failed to respond to adequate
schizophrenia (TRS) trials of antipsychotics in terms of dosage, duration and adherence
• Other causes of non‑response need to be considered such as, non‑compliance, adverse effects, comorbid conditions such as
substance misuse, before actually diagnosing treatment refractoriness
• Clozapine has been reported to be beneficial among patients with TRS
• The role of ECT in TRS has not been examined, although studies suggest that it could be useful
• Chosocial interventions such as cognitive therapy, family treatment, assertive outreach or crisis intervention are also
beneficial.
Clozapine – • There is some evidence to suggest that combining ECT with clozapine improves the outcome of patients who donot respond
resistance to clozapine alone
• Evidence for usefulness of combining clozapine with other antipsychotics, antidepressants, mood stabilizers is limited and
not convincing
Difficult to treat • Factors which make the patient difficult to treat include: inadequate response to antipsychotic, problems of adverse drug
schizophrenia effects, poor medication compliance, comorbidities, treatment failure and relapse on adequate drug dosages
• Issues related to medication compliance and adverse effects need to be addressed
• Antipsychotic need to be selected keeping the medical and psychiatric comorbidities in mind
• Patients with treatment resistance may be treated with clozapine.
• Patients having relapse of symptoms despite adequate dosages of 2 or more antipsychotics may also be treated with clozapine.
• Psychosocial factors influencing medication compliance need to be evaluated and addressed
Pregnancy • Many patients with schizophrenia have unplanned pregnancies and because of illness related variables, compared to those
without schizophrenia, women with schizophrenia more commonly have pregnancy outcomes in the form of low birth
weight, preterm birth, still birth and perinatal deaths
• Patients and caregivers need to be counselled about pregnancy and the risks and unplanned pregnancies may be avoided
• Most of the psychotropics belong to category ‘C’ or ‘D’, except for clozapine
• In general it is said that high potency antipsychotics have lower risk of foetal malformations
• Any decision to start antipsychotics, continue or discontinue antipsychotics need to take into account current level of
symptomatology, longitudinal course of symptoms, risk of relapse with stoppage of medication, effect of a particular
antipsychotic on foetal malformation and obstetrical complications
• All decisions about medications are to be taken after proper consultation with the patient, spouse and caregivers. A close
liaison with the obstetricians is helpful in monitoring patients during the pregnancy
Anticholinergic and antiadrenergic side effects: These Cardiovascular side effects: Among the cardiac side effects, the
side effects manifest as dry mouth, blurred vision, commonly encountered side effects include QTc prolongation,
constipation, urinary retention, thermoregulatory effects, orthostatic hypotension and tachycardia. QTc interval of
impaired learning and memory and slowed cognition. Some more than 500 milliseconds is associated with elevated risk
patient may develop confusion, delirium, somnolence and of ventricular arrhythmias, known as “torsades de pointes”,
hallucinations due to severe anticholinergic side effects. which may lead to ventricular fibrillation and sudden cardiac
Anticholinergic side effects are more commonly seen with death. Among the older antipsychotics, thioridazine, pimozide
clozapine and chlorpromazine. It is reported that the and high dose of intravenous haloperidol are reported to be
anticholinergic side effects are usually dose-dependent associated with increased risk of QTc prolongation. Among
and reduce with reduction in the dose of antipsychotic or the SGAs, ziprasidone is reported to have higher risk of
concomitantly used anticholinergic agent. QTc prolongation; however, this has not been shown to be
S30 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
Table 16: Management of Side Effects of Antipsychotics
Side effect First Step Other options
Antipsychotic induced Parkinsonism Reduce the dose Change the antipsychotic to an antipsychotic with lower EPS
potential
Acute dystonia Parenteral ‑ anticholinergic or antihistaminergic Short term use of anticholinergics to prevent recurrence
medications
Acute Akathisia Reduce the dose Change the antipsychotic to an antipsychotic with lower EPS
potential
Use‑ beta‑blockers, benzodiazepines
Tardive dyskinesia Stop the offending agent Clozapine in case there is worsening of psychosis
Vitamin‑E, benzodiazepines, anticholinergics
Tardive dystonia Stop the offending agent Clozapine in case there is worsening of psychosis
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome Stop the offending agent In treatment refractory NMS consider ECT
Supportive measures
Bromocriptine, amantadine, dantrolene
Lorazepam
QTc prolongation Reduce the dose Stop the offending agent
Change the antipsychotic to an antipsychotic with lower
potential for QTc prolongation
Orthostatic hypotension Reduce the dose Stop the offending agent
Change to an antipsychotic with lower antiadrenergic or no
antiadrenergic activity
Use of stockings, increasing the salt intake, fludrocortisone
Tachycardia due to anticholinergic Wait and watch for sometime in those without Peripherally acting beta‑blockers
action cardiac disease
Hyperprolactinemia and Sexual Reduce the dose Change to an antipsychotic with lower potential to cause
dysfunction hyper‑prolactinemia
Consider use of bromocriptine or amantidine if there is
hyperprolactinemia
Sexual dysfunction not associated with
hyperprolactinemia‑ Yohimbine, Cyproheptadine,
Imipramine (for retrograde ejaculation), Phospho‑diaesterase
inhibitors (for erectile dysfunction), antidepressants like
paroxetine, dapoxetine (for premature ejaculation)
Sedation Wait and watch – most patients develop tolerance In case of persistent sedation
Reduce the dose
Change to night time dose, if using the medication in divided
doses
Change to a less sedating agent
Anticholinergic and antiadrenergic Stop concommitant anticholinergic agent if used Change to an antipsychotic with lower anticholinergic properties
side effects Reduce the dose Constipation‑ high fibre diet, increase water intake, laxatives
In case of severe side effect like delirium
stoppage of offending agent may be required
associated with sudden cardiac deaths. In case, there is QTc anticholinergic activity, as seen with clozapine may be
prolongation, change of antipsychotic is to be considered. managed with low dose peripherally acting beta-blockers.
Hypotension associated with various antipsychotics is attributed Hyperprolactinemia and Sexual dysfunction: All antipsychotics
to antiadrenergic activity. It is commonly seen with clozapine, are shown to be associated with sexual dysfunction, although
risperidone, quetiapine. Among the FGAs, hypotension is often the rates vary with different antipsychotics. In general, rates
seen with chlorpromazine. Hypotension can be prevented of sexual dysfunction are reported to be higher with FGAs and
by starting with lower doses and slow upward titration of risperidone. One of the common causes for sexual dysfunction
medication. When a patient develops hypotension with a with FGAs and risperidone is increase in prolactin levels,
particular antipsychotic medication, the first step in management which leads to disruption of hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal
is to reduce the dose of the offending agent. If this does not axis. Females have been reported to be more sensitive to
help than switching to another agent with lower antiadrenergic hyperprolactinemia related sexual dysfunction. First step in
activity is to be considered. Additional management strategies management of hyperprolactinemia and sexual dysfunction
include use of stockings, increasing the salt intake and use of is reduction in the dose of antipsychotic medication. If this
fludrocortisone, which is a fluid retaining corticosteroid. option is not acceptable, change in antipsychotic is to be
considered. If change of antipsychotic is not possible, than
Tachycardia may be associated with hypotension or it may management with bromocriptine or amantidine may be
result due to anticholinergic activity. Tachycardia due to considered to lower the prolactin levels.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S31
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
Table 17: Risk factors for acute and tardive Monitoring for metabolic side effects: It is now well known
extrapyramidal side effects with antipsychotics that compared to subjects in the general population,
patients with schizophrenia have high rates of metabolic
Acute Dystonia
Use of high potency FGAs syndrome. Higher prevalence of metabolic syndrome
Young age suggests that clinicians need to monitor the patients for
Male gender emergence of metabolic side effects and manage the same
High doses
to reduce the cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
Intramuscular administration of antipsychotic medications
Antipsychotics have also been shown to increase the risk
Acute Akathisia
Use of high potency FGAs of development of diabetes mellitus. Further evidence
Tardive dyskinesia suggests that there is some discriminatory effect of various
Older age antipsychotic medications on metabolic profile. Clozapine
Female gender combined with postmenopausal status
and olanzapine have been reported to be associated
Use of FGAs
with highest risk for development of weight gain, lipid
Use of high doses of antipsychotic medications
Antipsychotic‑induced parkinsonism abnormalities and elevation in blood glucose levels (See
Concurrent general medical conditions like diabetes table-18).
Affective disorder (particularly major depressive disorder)
Tardive dystonia
Considering the metabolic side effects associated with
Use of high potency FGAs
Neuroleptic Malignant syndrome antipsychotics, various guidelines have been proposed and
Young age there are certain variations in the proposed monitoring
Male gender frequency. In general it is suggested that patients need to
Use of high potency antipsychotic
be monitored for metabolic disturbances at baseline, at
Rapid increase in the dose of antipsychotic
4-6 weeks and 12 weeks after starting antipsychotic and
Use of intramuscular preparation
then after every 3 months or at least annually (table-19).
Acute agitation
Preexisting neurological disability However, those who have personal and family history of
Comorbid physical illness obesity, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension
Dehydration
and/or cardiovascular disease are to be monitored 3
monthly.
Table 18: Risk of Metabolic side effects associated with
various antipsychotic medications6 However, in Indian setting, due to poor follow-up rates and
available resources, it may not be feasible to monitor all the
Antipsychotic medications Risk of lipid and/or Risk of
glucose metabolism weight gain parameters regularly. Efforts need to be made to monitor
abnormalities the weight and fasting blood glucose levels at every
FGAs treatment facility. Patients managed at training centres and
Chlorpromazine High (limited data) Substantial resourceful settings may consider complete monitoring of
Fluphenazine Low (limited data) Neutral/low metabolic parameters.
Haloperidol, Perphenazine Low Neutral/low
Thioridazine High (limited data) Intermediate
If a patient develops metabolic abnormalities, switching
SGAs
Clozapine, Olanzapine High Substantial of antipsychotic may be considered. In general if a patient
Quetiapine Moderate Intermediate gains more than 7% of the baseline weight or develops
Risperidone, Iloperidone, Mild Intermediate hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, hypertension or any other
Paliperidone, Sertindole
significant cardiovascular or metabolic side effect, then
Lurasidone Low (limited data) Intermediate
a change in antipsychotic is to be considered. However,
Zotepine Not reported Intermediate
Asenapine Low (limited data) Low while considering switching, clinicians need to take into
Amisulpride Mild Neutral/low consideration the entire course of the illness, comorbid
Ziprasidone, Aripiprazole Low Neutral/low physical illnesses, side effect profile of medication which
Table 19: Monitoring for metabolic disturbance while receiving various antipsychotic medications
Baseline 6 weeks after starting 12 weeks after starting Atleast annually
antipsychotics antipsychotics thereafter
Medical History X
Weight/waist circumference/BMI X X X X
Blood Pressure X X X X
Fasting glucose levels X X X X
Fasting lipids X X X X
Lifestyle modification advise X X X X
S32 Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017
Grover, et al.: CPG for Schizophrenia
caused metabolic side effects and the potential side effects 21. Kulhara P, Chakrabarti S. Clinical Practice guidelines for management of
schizophrenia. In: Clinical Practice Guidelines for Psychiatrists in India
with proposed medication to be used after switching. If
on Schizophrenia, depression, bipolar affective disorders, obsessive
switching of antipsychotic is not possible then medications compulsive disorder, Generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder.
like metformin or topiramate may be considered, along Eds: Gautam S, Avasthi A. Indian Psychiatric Society, 2005.
22. Kulhara P. Management of Schizophrenia: An Update. Indian J Psychiatry
with more intensive dietary and life style modifications. A
1998;40: 120‑134.
close liaison need to be maintained with endocrinologist 23. Larsen ER, Damkier P, Pedersen LH, Fenger‑Gron J,
Mikkelsen RL, Nielsen RE, Linde VJ, Knudsen HED, Skaarup L,
and cardiologist to provide best quality care to patients.
Videbech P. Use of psychotropic drugs during pregnancy and breast‑feeding.
ActaPsychiatrScand 2015: 132 (Suppl. 445): 1–28
SUGGESTED READING 24. Lehman AF, Kreyenbuhl J, Buchanan RW, Dickerson FB, Dixon LB,
Goldberg R, Green‑Paden LD, Tenhula WN, Boerescu D, Tek C,
Sandson N, Steinwachs DM. The Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes
1. American Psychiatric Association. Practice guideline for the treatment of Research Team (PORT): updated treatment recommendations 2003.
patients with schizophrenia, second edition. Am J Psychiatry 2004; 161 Schizophr Bull 2004;30(2):193–217.
(supplement):1‑56. 25. Lehman AF, Lieberman JA, Dixon LB, McGlashan TH, Miller AL, Perkins DO,
2. Avasthi A, Agarwal M, Grover S, Khan MKR. Research on antipsychotics Kreyenbuhl J; American Psychiatric Association; Steering Committee on
in India. Indian J Psychiatry, 2010; 52 (Suppl): S317‑340. Practice Guidelines. Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with
3. Chakrabarti S. Impact of Schizophrenia on caregivers: The Indian schizophrenia, second edition. Am J Psychiatry 2004;161(2 Suppl):1‑56.
Perspective. In: Schizophrenia: The Indian Scene. Eds (2nd edition): 26. Leucht S, Corves C, Arbter D, Engel RR, Li C, Davis JM. Second‑generation
P Kulhara, A Avasthi, S Grover. Published by PsyPROM, PGIMER, versus first-generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: A
Chandigarh, Chandika Press, Barwala, Haryana, 2010, pp 215‑262. meta‑analysis. Lancet. 2009;373:31‑41.
4. Chakrabarti S. What’s in a name? Compliance, adherence and 27. Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA,
concordance in chronic psychiatric disorders. World J Psychiatry 2014; 4: Perkins DO, Keefe RS, Davis SM, Davis CE, Lebowitz BD, Severe J,
30‑36. Hsiao JK. Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE)
5. CRAG/SCOTMEG Working Group on Mental Illness. Services for people Investigators Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic
affected by schizophrenia. A good practice statement. The Scottish Office. schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2005 22;353:1209‑23.
National Health Service in Scotland, 1995. 28. Lieberman JA, Stroup TS. The NIMH‑CATIE Schizophrenia Study: what
6. De Hert M, Detraux J, Winkel R, Yu W, Correll CU. Metabolic and did we learn? Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168:770‑5.
cardiovascular adverse effectsassociated with antipsychotic drugs. Nat. 29. Malhotra N, Grover S, Chakrabarti S, Kulhara P. Metabolic Syndrome
Rev. Endocrinol. 2012; 8: 114–126.
in Schizophrenia: A review.Indian J Psychological Medicine 2013; 35:
7. Expert Consensus Guidelines, LLC. Expert Consensus Guideline Series.
227‑240.
Treatment of Schizophrenia. Memphis, Physicians Postgraduate Press
30. McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Perkins DO, Hamer RM, Gu H, Lazarus A,
Inc, 1999.
Sweitzer D, Olexy C, Weiden P, Strakowski SD. Efficacy and tolerability
8. Gasquet I, Haro JM, Tcherny‑Lessenot S, Chartier F, Lépine JP.
of olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in the treatment of early
Remission in the outpatient care of schizophrenia: 3‑year results from the
psychosis: a randomized, double‑blind 52‑week comparison. Am J
Schizophrenia Outpatients Health Outcomes (SOHO) study in France. Eur
Psychiatry 2007;164:1050‑60.
Psychiatry. 2008;23:491‑6.
31. McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, Davis SM, Meltzer HY,
9. Grover S, Avasthi A. Antipsychotic prescription pattern: a preliminary
Rosenheck RA, Swartz MS, Perkins DO, Keefe RS, Davis CE, Severe J,
survey of Psychiatrists in India. Indian J Psychiatry, 2010; 52: 257‑259.
Hsiao JK. Effectiveness of clozapine versus olanzapine, quetiapine, and
10. Grover S, Avasthi A. Mood Stabilizers in pregnancy. Indian J Psychiatry
risperidone in patients with chronic schizophrenia who did not respond to
2015; 57 (Suppl 2): 308‑23.
prior atypical antipsychotic treatment. Am J Psychiatry 2006;163:600–10.
11. Grover S, Avasthi A. Views about clinical practice guidelines of the Indian
32. McEvoy JP, Scheifler PL, Frances A. The Expert Consensus Guideline
Psychiatric Society: A survey of psychiatrists in India. Indian J Psychiatry
Series: Treatment of Schizophrenia 1999. J Clin Psychiatry 1999;60
2009; 51: 127‑33.
(Suppl 11).
12. Grover S, Dutt A, Avasthi A. Indian Research: focus on Clozapine. Indian
33. Miller AL, Chiles JA, Chiles JK, Crismon ML, Rush AJ, Shon SP. The Texas
J Psychiatry, 2010; 52:168‑173.
Medication Algorithm Project (TMAP) schizophrenia algorithms. J Clin
13. Grover S, Hazari N, Kate N. Combined use of clozapine and ECT: A
Psychiatry. 1999;60:649‑57.
review. ActaNeuropsychiatrica 2015; 27: 131‑142.
34. Nakajima S, Takeuchi H, Fervaha G, Plitman E, Chung JK, Caravaggio F,
14. Haro JM, Edgell ET, Frewer P, Alonso J, Jones PB on behalf of the
Iwata Y, Mihashi Y, Gerretsen P, Remington G, Mulsant B, Graff‑Guerrero A.
SOHO Study Group. The European Schizophrenia Outpatient Health
Comparative efficacy between clozapine and other atypical antipsychotics
Outcomes Study: baseline findings across country and treatment.
ActaPsychiatrScand 2003;107(suppl. 416):1–9. on depressive symptoms in patients with schizophrenia: analysis of the
15. Haro JM, Edgell ET, Novick D, Alonso J, Kennedy L, Jones PB, Ratcliffe CATIE phase 2E data. Schizophr Res. 2015;161:429‑33.
M, Breier A. Effectiveness of antipsychotic treatment for schizophrenia: 35. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Psychosis and
6‑month results of the Pan‑European Schizophrenia Outpatient Health schizophrenia in adults: prevention and management Clinical guideline
Outcomes (SOHO) study. ActaPsychiatrScand 2005: 111: 220–231. (CG 178), 2014.
16. Haro JM, Novick D, Suarez D & Roca M: Antipsychotic treatment 36. Novick D, Haro JM, Suarez D, Vieta E &Naber D: Recovery in the
discontinuation in previously untreated patients with schizophrenia: outpatient setting: 36‑month results from the Schizophrenia Outpatients
36‑month results from the SOHO study. J Psychiatr Res. 2009 ;43:265‑73. Health Outcomes (SOHO) study. Schizophr Res. 2009; 108:223‑30.
17. Hazari N, Kate N, Grover S. Clozapine and Tardive movement Disorders: 37. Perkins DO, Gu H, Weiden PJ, McEvoy JP, HamerRM , Lieberman JA.
A review. Asian J Psychiatry 2013;6: 439‑451. Comparison of Atypicals in First Episode study group Predictors of treatment
18. Jones PB, Barnes TR, Davies L, Dunn G, Lloyd H, Hayhurst KP, Murray RM, discontinuation and medication nonadherence in patients recovering
Markwick A & Lewis SW. Randomised controlled trial of effect on quality from a first episode of schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, or
of life of second- vs first generation antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia: schizoaffective disorder: a randomized, double-blind, flexible dose,
Cost Utility of the Latest Antipsychotic drugs in Schizophrenia Study multicenter study. J Clin Psychiatry. 2008; 69:106‑13.
(CUtLASS 1). Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006;63:1079‑87. 38. Stroup TS, Lieberman JA, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Davis SM,
19. Kahn RS, Fleischhacker WW, Boter H, Davidson M, Vergouwe Y, Capuano GA, Rosenheck RA, Keefe RS, Miller AL, Belz I, Hsiao JK.
Keet IP, Gheorghe MD, Rybakowski JK, Galderisi S, Libiger J, Hummer M, Effectiveness of olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in patients with
Dollfus S, López‑Ibor JJ, Hranov LG, Gaebel W, Peuskens J, Lindefors N, chronic schizophrenia after discontinuing perphenazine: a CATIE study.
Riecher‑Rössler A &Grobbee DE; EUFEST study group. Effectiveness of Am J Psychiatry 2007;164(3):415–27.
antipsychotic drugs in first-episode schizophrenia and schizophreniform 39. Stroup TS, Lieberman JA, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Davis SM, Rosenheck
disorder: an open randomised clinical trial. Lancet. 2008;371 RA, Perkins DO, Keefe RS, Davis CE, Severe J, Hsiao JK. Effectiveness
(9618):1085‑97. of olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone in patients with
20. Kulhara P, Chakrabarti S, Avasthi A, Sharma A, Sharma S. chronic schizophrenia following discontinuation of a previous atypical
Psychoeducational intervention for caregivers of Indian patients with antipsychotic. Am J Psychiatry 2006;163(4):611–22.
schizophrenia: a randomised‑controlled trial. ActaPsychiatr Scand. 40. Suarez D, Haro JM. Overview of the findings from the European SOHO
2009;119(6):472‑83. study. Expert Rev Neurother. 2008; 8:873‑80.
Indian J Psychiatry 59 (Supplement 1), January 2017 S33